Hurst were going out. She had not deserved it; she had often been negligent
or perverse, slighting his advice, or even wilfully opposing him,
insensible of half his merits, and quarrelling with him because he
would not acknowledge her false and insolent estimate of her own—but
still, from family attachment and habit, and thorough excellence of
mind, he had loved her, and watched over her from a girl, with an
endeavour to improve her, and an anxiety for her doing right, which no
other creature had at all shared. I had no right to expect
much, and I did not expect much; but I had no idea that he could be so
very clownish, so totally without air. I beg you will not go. It is Mrs. Jane resolutely
kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went
to the window--she looked--she saw Mr. Ever since I left you this morning, Emma, my mind has been
hard at work on one subject.”

The subject followed; it was in plain, unaffected, gentlemanlike
English, such as Mr. Weston, at
dinner, he made use of the very first interval in the cares of
hospitality, the very first leisure from the saddle of mutton, to say
to her,

“We want only two more to be just the right number. To treat
her with unkindness, to speak of her slightingly is no atonement to
Marianne—nor can I suppose it a relief to your own conscience.”

“Do not talk to me of my wife,” said he with a heavy sigh; “she does
not deserve your compassion. Nay, the longer they
were together the more doubtful seemed the nature of his regard; and
sometimes, for a few painful minutes, she believed it to be no more
than friendship. So far was she, at the same time, from any backwardness to give Elinor
that credit which Edward _would_ give her, that she spoke of her
friendship for them both with the most grateful warmth, was ready to
own all their obligation to her, and openly declared that no exertion
for their good on Miss Dashwood’s part, either present or future, would
ever surprise her, for she believed her capable of doing any thing in
the world for those she really valued. Collins. I am only ashamed of his asking so little.”

“And they _must_ marry! Instead of
viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and
welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. That could not
be—and I was formally dismissed from her favour and her house. Bennet at conversation, and, by so doing, threw a
languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long
speeches of Mr. “Oh dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. She inquired into Charlotte’s domestic
concerns familiarly and minutely, and gave her a great deal of advice as
to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be
regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the
care of her cows and her poultry. John Knightley.—This did not want much of being finished, when I
put it away in a pet, and vowed I would never take another likeness. She had been a friend and companion such
as few possessed: intelligent, well-informed, useful, gentle, knowing
all the ways of the family, interested in all its concerns, and
peculiarly interested in herself, in every pleasure, every scheme of
hers—one to whom she could speak every thought as it arose, and who had
such an affection for her as could never find fault. “DEAR SIR,
    “Being very sure I have long lost your affections, I have thought
    myself at liberty to bestow my own on another, and have no doubt of
    being as happy with him as I once used to think I might be with
    you; but I scorn to accept a hand while the heart was another’s. She was, of course, the
object of their joint dislike.—When they had nothing else to say, it
must be always easy to begin abusing Miss Woodhouse; and the enmity
which they dared not shew in open disrespect to her, found a broader
vent in contemptuous treatment of Harriet. dear Lizzy,
only consider what he must have suffered. Darcy’s letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style, and still
different from either was what Mr. Skilful has been the hand!”

“Great has been the pleasure, I am sure. what would Frank
Churchill say to her, if he were here? I have not had so many opportunities
of estimating the minuter propensities of his mind, his inclinations
and tastes, as you have; but I have the highest opinion in the world of
his goodness and sense. Elton quitted them, and she could not but do him
the justice of feeling that there was a great deal of sentiment in his
manner of naming Harriet at parting; in the tone of his voice while
assuring her that he should call at Mrs. He made her no answer; and only observed, after again examining the
room, that it was very low pitched, and that the ceiling was crooked. Yet it did, and even the third. Oh! I did not wink at you.” She then sat still
five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she
suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty,--

“Come here, my love, I want to speak to you,” took her out of the room. “I think every one _must_ admire it,” replied Elinor, “who ever saw the
place; though it is not to be supposed that any one can estimate its
beauties as we do.”

“And had you a great many smart beaux there? “How can you be smiling so,
Lizzy?”

Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what
she had herself endured on a similar occasion five-and-twenty years ago. I could not have parted with
you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”

To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr. She felt immediately that she
should like him; and there was a well-bred ease of manner, and a
readiness to talk, which convinced her that he came intending to be
acquainted with her, and that acquainted they soon must be. No, upon my
honour, there is no unsteadiness of character. “Does that young lady know Mr. Human nature is so prone to
fall into it! While in their cradles we planned the
union; and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be
accomplished, is their marriage to be prevented by a young woman of
inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to
the family? Her height was pretty, just such as
almost every body would think tall, and nobody could think very tall;
her figure particularly graceful; her size a most becoming medium,
between fat and thin, though a slight appearance of ill-health seemed
to point out the likeliest evil of the two. had I known what
I ought, what I dared to do! I take up my pen
again to do, what I have just told you I would not; but circumstances
are such, that I cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as
soon as possible. The extreme
sweetness of her temper must hurt his. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage it was more difficult
to understand. Does not she, Jane?—Do not we often talk of Mr. Weston. Elinor needed little
observation to perceive that her reserve was a mere calmness of manner
with which sense had nothing to do. She thought there was an air of greater happiness
than usual—a glow both of complexion and spirits. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly--and her patience
and her ideas were nearly worn out before the _tête-à-tête_ was over. Churchill. “Do you prefer reading to cards?” said he; “that is rather singular.”

“Miss Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, “despises cards. no,” said he; “it would be the extreme of imprudence. “I feel no sentiment of
approbation inferior to love.”

“You may esteem him.”

“I have never yet known what it was to separate esteem and love.”

Mrs. The work of one moment was destroyed by the next. So you would all. “I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and, when
your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of
the ball. But, I
confess, it would give me great pleasure to call Colonel Brandon
brother. Jennings’s servant, who came to tell her that his mistress waited for
them at the door. Well, what do you say
to it?—I always told you he would be here again soon, did not I?—Anne,
my dear, did not I always tell you so, and you would not believe me?—In
town next week, you see—at the latest, I dare say; for _she_ is as
impatient as the black gentleman when any thing is to be done; most
likely they will be there to-morrow or Saturday. She directly replied,--

“You need not be frightened. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his
attentions to herself most pleasing; and they prevented her feeling
herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the
others. Jennings’s
entering into her sorrows with any compassion. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule
to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the
door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she
entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in
warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. When Robert first sought her acquaintance, and privately
visited her in Bartlett’s Buildings, it was only with the view imputed
to him by his brother. Cole had moved away, and her attention could be restored as
before, she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room at
Miss Fairfax, who was sitting exactly opposite. Miss Bennet’s pleasing manners grew on the
good-will of Mrs. In the hope of diverting her father’s thoughts from the
disagreeableness of Mr. “If I had not persuaded Harriet into liking the man, I could have borne
any thing. Oh no.”

“I can much more easily believe Mr. She never had been so depressed. Frank Churchill’s
confession of having behaved shamefully was the first thing to call for
more than a word in passing. It did not
accord with the rationality of plan, the moderation in expense, or even
the unselfish warmth of heart, which she had believed herself to
discern in him yesterday. It is something to think of, and gives her a sort of distinction
among her companions. But, however, that shan’t prevent my asking him to dine here, I
am determined. I have no
notion of people’s making such a to-do about money and greatness. What are we to do?” would they
often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. The muffin last night—if it had been
handed round once, I think it would have been enough.”

“No,” said Mr. You
cannot imagine how suddenly it has come on me! If he
were to be very alert in engaging Jane Fairfax now, it might augur
something. “And--may I ask?” said Elizabeth; “but the terms, I suppose, must be
complied with.”

“Complied with! It seemed like
wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance; for on these occasions it was
not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away,
but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. Mrs. Darcy, and her resolution to be
civil to him only as Mr. I am glad to find, however, from what you
say, that he is a respectable young man, and one whose acquaintance
will not be ineligible.”

“He is as good a sort of fellow, I believe, as ever lived,” repeated
Sir John. the coldness of a Jane Fairfax!—Harriet is worth a
hundred such—And for a wife—a sensible man’s wife—it is invaluable. She then
proceeded to say a good deal more than she felt, of the advantage of
such an addition to their confined society in Surry; the pleasure of
looking at somebody new; the gala-day to Highbury entire, which the
sight of him would have made; and ending with reflections on the
Churchills again, found herself directly involved in a disagreement
with Mr. It was a pity that she had not come back earlier! The gruel came and supplied
a great deal to be said—much praise and many comments—undoubting
decision of its wholesomeness for every constitution, and pretty severe
Philippics upon the many houses where it was never met with
tolerably;—but, unfortunately, among the failures which the daughter
had to instance, the most recent, and therefore most prominent, was in
her own cook at South End, a young woman hired for the time, who never
had been able to understand what she meant by a basin of nice smooth
gruel, thin, but not too thin. Jennings, with both
her friends, received a very warm invitation from Charlotte to go with
them. My dear Harriet, what are you thinking
of? You may
believe me, Mrs. Mr. Frank Churchill
are to be married, and that they have been privately engaged to one
another this long while. Perhaps she pitied and esteemed him the more because he was slighted by
Willoughby and Marianne, who, prejudiced against him for being neither
lively nor young, seemed resolved to undervalue his merits. My cousins say they
are sure I have made a conquest; but for my part I declare I never
think about him from one hour’s end to another. Though aware, before she began it, that it
must bring a confession of his inconstancy, and confirm their
separation for ever, she was not aware that such language could be
suffered to announce it; nor could she have supposed Willoughby capable
of departing so far from the appearance of every honourable and
delicate feeling—so far from the common decorum of a gentleman, as to
send a letter so impudently cruel: a letter which, instead of bringing
with his desire of a release any professions of regret, acknowledged no
breach of faith, denied all peculiar affection whatever—a letter of
which every line was an insult, and which proclaimed its writer to be
deep in hardened villainy. “What is to be done, my dear Emma?—what is to be done?” was Mr. Mrs. James’s. Elinor could
not hear the declaration, nor witness its proofs without sometimes
wondering whether her mother ever recollected Edward. Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of
her stay as they had been at first. Yet he would speak. I am grown very happy; but that would not
interest. I found Harriet more conversable than I expected.”

Emma was extremely gratified.—They were interrupted by the bustle of
Mr. Mr. Ambition, as well as love, had probably been mortified. “Yes,” he replied, “any body may know how highly I think of her.”

“And yet,” said Emma, beginning hastily and with an arch look, but soon
stopping—it was better, however, to know the worst at once—she hurried
on—“And yet, perhaps, you may hardly be aware yourself how highly it
is. While you were at all in suspense I kept my feelings to
myself, but now that you are so completely decided I have no hesitation
in approving. He meant to provide for me amply,
and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given
elsewhere.”

“Good heavens!” cried Elizabeth; “but how could _that_ be? They might be
more safely held up as a pattern. It can be allowable only as the
thought of the moment.”

Somebody said that _Miss_ Gilbert was expected at her brother’s, and
must be invited with the rest. you would rather talk of her person than her mind, would you? “Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse, you are all kindness.—It is impossible
to say—Yes, indeed, I quite understand—dearest Jane’s prospects—that
is, I do not mean.—But she is charmingly recovered.—How is Mr. Mr. Dear me! Till this moment, I never knew myself.”

From herself to Jane, from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line
which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. They then went away. Churchill as the cause. Music seems scarcely to attract
him, and though he admires Elinor’s drawings very much, it is not the
admiration of a person who can understand their worth. “Other great and inevitable expenses too we have had on first coming to
Norland. Elton is a very pretty young man, to be sure, and a very good
young man, and I have a great regard for him. Palmer and
Sir John against ever naming Mr. I know nothing of the picturesque.”

“I am afraid it is but too true,” said Marianne; “but why should you
boast of it?”

“I suspect,” said Elinor, “that to avoid one kind of affectation,
Edward here falls into another. When there, though looking most wretchedly, she ate more and was calmer
than her sister had expected. Woodhouse gratefully observed, “It is very kind of you, Mr. Weston’s on the subject, as much as possible. Though her nephew had had no particular reason
to hasten back on her account, she had not lived above six-and-thirty
hours after his return. She instantly wrote Sir
John Middleton her acknowledgment of his kindness, and her acceptance
of his proposal; and then hastened to show both letters to her
daughters, that she might be secure of their approbation before her
answer were sent. “My dearest child,” she cried, “I can think of nothing else. “You are extremely kind,” replied Miss Bates, highly gratified; “you
who are such a judge, and write so beautifully yourself. Mr. I never saw any thing equal to the comfort and
style—Candles everywhere.—I was telling you of your grandmama,
Jane,—There was a little disappointment.—The baked apples and biscuits,
excellent in their way, you know; but there was a delicate fricassee of
sweetbread and some asparagus brought in at first, and good Mr. She rose early, and wrote her letter to Harriet; an employment which
left her so very serious, so nearly sad, that Mr. Elizabeth found that nothing was
beneath this great lady’s attention which could furnish her with an
occasion for dictating to others. “He should be happy to see Mrs. “What can you have to do in town at
this time of year?”

“My own loss is great,” he continued, “in being obliged to leave so
agreeable a party; but I am the more concerned, as I fear my presence
is necessary to gain your admittance at Whitwell.”

What a blow upon them all was this! Woodhouse’s life; and upon being applied to,
he could not but acknowledge (though it seemed rather against the bias
of inclination) that wedding-cake might certainly disagree with
many—perhaps with most people, unless taken moderately. Weston, and of moments only of regret; and her satisfaction—her more
than satisfaction—her cheerful enjoyment, was so just and so apparent,
that Emma, well as she knew her father, was sometimes taken by surprize
at his being still able to pity ‘poor Miss Taylor,’ when they left her
at Randalls in the centre of every domestic comfort, or saw her go away
in the evening attended by her pleasant husband to a carriage of her
own. how concerned Sir John and my daughters will be when
they hear it! Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother’s opinion, and she
submitted to it therefore without opposition, though it proved
perfectly different from what she wished and expected, though she felt
it to be entirely wrong, formed on mistaken grounds, and that by
requiring her longer continuance in London it deprived her of the only
possible alleviation of her wretchedness, the personal sympathy of her
mother, and doomed her to such society and such scenes as must prevent
her ever knowing a moment’s rest. Mrs. She was
far from depending on that result of his preference of her, which her
mother and sister still considered as certain. Gardiner’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on
the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone: after
honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:--

“You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you
are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking
openly. Knightley would be
much disturbed by Miss Bates. Bingley himself, instead of a
ceremonious card. Lucy was naturally clever; her remarks were often just and amusing; and
as a companion for half an hour Elinor frequently found her agreeable;
but her powers had received no aid from education: she was ignorant and
illiterate; and her deficiency of all mental improvement, her want of
information in the most common particulars, could not be concealed from
Miss Dashwood, in spite of her constant endeavour to appear to
advantage. Willoughby’s, and—”

“If they were one day to be your own, Marianne, you would not be
justified in what you have done.”

She blushed at this hint; but it was even visibly gratifying to her;
and after a ten minutes’ interval of earnest thought, she came to her
sister again, and said with great good humour, “Perhaps, Elinor, it
_was_ rather ill-judged in me to go to Allenham; but Mr. I have seen you only as the admirer of my
friend. Goddard; and Emma should write a line, and invite her. ought he not to have told me of it, to have given me the power of
clearing myself? Willoughby and herself, he would not have ventured to
mention it. Willoughby would at once
be a woman of elegance and fortune, to leave her card with her as soon
as she married. Knightley, none of Mr. Darcy is.”

“Probably not; but Mr. She is not a clever girl, but she
has better sense than you are aware of, and does not deserve to have
her understanding spoken of so slightingly. He must have
had a wet ride.—Yes.—He meant to walk with her, she found. Weston, on his side, added a virtue to the account which must have
some weight. She repeated it to Edward. Dashwood now looked at her daughter; but Elinor knew better than
to expect them. But
pray, Colonel, how came you to conjure out that I should be in town
today?”

“I had the pleasure of hearing it at Mr. One man’s style must not be the rule of another’s. But really I
never understood that you were at all connected with that family, and
therefore I am a little surprised, I confess, at so serious an inquiry
into her character.”

“I dare say you are, and I am sure I do not at all wonder at it. Knightley; and exclaimed quite
as much as was necessary, (or, being acting a part, perhaps rather
more,) at the conduct of the Churchills, in keeping him away. Willoughby’s portrait was
drawn, and at what warehouse Miss Grey’s clothes might be seen. I will answer for the gentleman’s
indifference.”

She spoke with a confidence which staggered, with a satisfaction which
silenced, Mr. There will be
enough of them, in all probability, to supply every sort of sensation
that declining life can need. Now was the time
when her son-in-law’s promise to his father might with particular
propriety be fulfilled. Collins seemed neither in need
of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. I have
not the smallest hope. This, on his side, might merely proceed from her not
being thought of; but Emma was rather inclined to attribute it to
delicacy, and a suspicion, from some appearances, that their friendship
were declining. However, I did not hear above one word in ten, for I was
thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. “I do not get on at all. Jennings still lower in her estimation; because, through her own
weakness, it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to herself, though
Mrs. [Illustration:

     “Piling up the fire”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER XI. Weston presently, “what
became of Mr. In
half an hour the arrowroot was returned, with a thousand thanks from
Miss Bates, but “dear Jane would not be satisfied without its being
sent back; it was a thing she could not take—and, moreover, she
insisted on her saying, that she was not at all in want of any thing.”

When Emma afterwards heard that Jane Fairfax had been seen wandering
about the meadows, at some distance from Highbury, on the afternoon of
the very day on which she had, under the plea of being unequal to any
exercise, so peremptorily refused to go out with her in the carriage,
she could have no doubt—putting every thing together—that Jane was
resolved to receive no kindness from _her_. Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think
him less agreeable. my dear,’
said I—well, and just then came the note. It
seems quite ridiculous. I shall write again as soon as
     anything more is determined on. It was not
in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them. Their reception from Mr. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings,
and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of
quadrille in the evening. I should like
it of all things,” was not plainer in words than manner. “He seems to be a most
conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and, I doubt not, will
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
indulgent as to let him come to us again.”

“There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however; and, if
he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to
discourage him.”

“Though it is difficult,” said Jane, “to guess in what way he can mean
to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his
credit.”

Elizabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary deference for Lady
Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying
his parishioners whenever it were required. I was
miserable. Wickham
in and near Brighton with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have
pledged myself. I remember one evening the poor boys saying, ‘Uncle seems
always tired now.’”

The time was coming when the news must spread farther, and other
persons’ reception of it tried. if you knew how much I love every thing that is decided and
open!—Good-bye, good-bye.”




CHAPTER XVII


Mrs. I had quite depended upon meeting you there. But there was no peculiar disgrace in this; for it was very
much the case with the chief of their visitors, who almost all laboured
under one or other of these disqualifications for being agreeable—Want
of sense, either natural or improved—want of elegance—want of
spirits—or want of temper. George Otway; she will love
to tell you all about it herself to-morrow: her first partner was Mr. Perry. She believed she had been foolish,
but it had alarmed her, and she had been within half a minute of
sending for Mr. It is not so very likely he should be distressed in his
circumstances _now_, for he is a very prudent man, and to be sure must
have cleared the estate by this time. as for me, my judgment is worth nothing. I will not reason here—nor will I stop for
_you_ to expatiate on the absurdity, and the worse than absurdity, of
scrupling to engage my faith where my honour was already bound. Weston, “if Emma comes away early, it
will be breaking up the party.”

“And no great harm if it does,” said Mr. “Oh, don’t think of me!” she replied with spirited earnestness, though
her eyes were filled with tears as she spoke, “don’t think of _my_
health. Knightley had done all in his power for Mr. Elinor felt equal
amazement. His
appearance is so much against him, and his manner so bad, that if she
ever were disposed to favour him, she is not now. They saw much to
interest, but nothing to justify inquiry. We are not on friendly terms,
and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for
avoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim to all the world--a sense of
very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is. I know not what to think. Miss Bingley’s congratulations to her brother on his approaching
marriage were all that was affectionate and insincere. Such kind friends, you know, Miss
Woodhouse, one must always find agreeable, though every body seemed
rather fagged after the morning’s party. I have thought it all
over I assure you, and I can perfectly account for every thing that at
first seemed strange to me as well as to you.”

“Can you, indeed!”

“Yes. You saw I did not all dinner time. Knightley. He recommended it for all the children, but particularly for
the weakness in little Bella’s throat,—both sea air and bathing.”

“Ah! If I were to
marry, I must expect to repent it.”

“Dear me!—it is so odd to hear a woman talk so!”—

“I have none of the usual inducements of women to marry. Weston might be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise
and variety which her spirits seemed to need. Most cordially, when Miss Bates arrived, did she agree that it must. In this calm kind of way, with very little interest on either side,
they continued to talk, both of them out of spirits, and the thoughts
of both engaged elsewhere. They would soon, she supposed, be settled at Delaford.—Delaford,—that
place in which so much conspired to give her an interest; which she
wished to be acquainted with, and yet desired to avoid. While these
newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of
Elizabeth’s feelings was every moment increasing. But we never did. And then, you
know, when once they get together, there is no end of it. Her sister, however, still sanguine, was
willing to attribute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of
having sat up to have her bed made; and carefully administering the
cordials prescribed, saw her, with satisfaction, sink at last into a
slumber, from which she expected the most beneficial effects. Henceforward I
know nothing of the matter. It is a pity that they were ever
got over.”

“Not Harriet’s equal!” exclaimed Mr. Weston, smiling, “you give him credit for more
simple, disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do; for while
Miss Bates was speaking, a suspicion darted into my head, and I have
never been able to get it out again. that’s all. This is not quite
enough to make her understand his character.”

“Not as you represent it. Had Lydia’s marriage been
concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that
Mr. Sighs and fine words had been given in abundance; but she
could hardly devise any set of expressions, or fancy any tone of voice,
less allied with real love. or Mrs. And when he was gone, she almost
quarrelled with me—No, I should not say quarrelled, for we never had a
quarrel in our lives; but she was quite distressed that I had owned the
apples were so nearly gone; she wished I had made him believe we had a
great many left. I am sure they will be married
very soon, for he has got a lock of her hair.”

“Take care, Margaret. “M.D.”


Her second note, which had been written on the morning after the dance
at the Middletons’, was in these words:—

“I cannot express my disappointment in having missed you the day before
yesterday, nor my astonishment at not having received any answer to a
note which I sent you above a week ago. He would save himself from witnessing again such
permitted, encouraged attentions.—He had gone to learn to be
indifferent.—But he had gone to a wrong place. He was too happy, however, to need much attention;
and, luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them
from a great deal of his company. Churchill was unwell—far too unwell to do without
him; she had been in a very suffering state (so said her husband) when
writing to her nephew two days before, though from her usual
unwillingness to give pain, and constant habit of never thinking of
herself, she had not mentioned it; but now she was too ill to trifle,
and must entreat him to set off for Enscombe without delay. Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them
mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that no
real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Woodhouse must not, under the
specious pretence of a morning drive, and an hour or two spent at
Donwell, be tempted away to his misery. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a
fourth. Goddard’s half an hour ago—she had
been afraid it would rain—she had been afraid it would pour down every
moment—but she thought she might get to Hartfield first—she had hurried
on as fast as possible; but then, as she was passing by the house where
a young woman was making up a gown for her, she thought she would just
step in and see how it went on; and though she did not seem to stay
half a moment there, soon after she came out it began to rain, and she
did not know what to do; so she ran on directly, as fast as she could,
and took shelter at Ford’s.”—Ford’s was the principal woollen-draper,
linen-draper, and haberdasher’s shop united; the shop first in size and
fashion in the place.—“And so, there she had set, without an idea of
any thing in the world, full ten minutes, perhaps—when, all of a
sudden, who should come in—to be sure it was so very odd!—but they
always dealt at Ford’s—who should come in, but Elizabeth Martin and her
brother!—Dear Miss Woodhouse! Jennings’s notice entirely to herself. I wish you could have heard her honouring your
forbearance, in being able to pay her such attentions, as she was for
ever receiving from yourself and your father, when her society must be
so irksome.”

“Oh!” cried Emma, “I know there is not a better creature in the world:
but you must allow, that what is good and what is ridiculous are most
unfortunately blended in her.”

“They are blended,” said he, “I acknowledge; and, were she prosperous,
I could allow much for the occasional prevalence of the ridiculous over
the good. He has many friends, and he is
at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually
increasing.”

“If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for the
neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we
might possibly get a settled family there. In the gayest and happiest spirits she set forward with her father; not
always listening, but always agreeing to what he said; and, whether in
speech or silence, conniving at the comfortable persuasion of his being
obliged to go to Randalls every day, or poor Mrs. There, it is done. He had gone away rejected and
mortified—disappointed in a very sanguine hope, after a series of what
appeared to him strong encouragement; and not only losing the right
lady, but finding himself debased to the level of a very wrong one. Bennet retired to the library, as was his
custom, and Mary went upstairs to her instrument. Dixon) excessively to come over with Colonel and Mrs. It was the
scrape which he had drawn her into on Harriet’s account, that gave the
deepest hue to his offence.—Poor Harriet! He was struggling for the
appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed
himself to have attained it. he has _some_ friends, though, perhaps, not so many as he
deserves.”

Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Mr. Emma returned all
her attention to her father, saying in secret—

“I am glad I have done being in love with him. after taking her all over Allenham House, and fixing on the
very rooms they were to live in hereafter!”

Elinor, for her sister’s sake, could not press the subject farther, and
she hoped it was not required of her for Willoughby’s; since, though
Marianne might lose much, he could gain very little by the enforcement
of the real truth. He walked
off to find his father, but was quickly back again with both Mr. Bingley when he comes into
the neighbourhood.”

“It is more than I engage for, I assure you.”

“But consider your daughters. “When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. It was the favourite wish of
_his_ mother, as well as of hers. She is his principal correspondent, I assure you. Lord
bless me!—I am sure it would put _me_ quite out of patience!—And though
one would be very glad to do a kindness by poor Mr. Her nose wants
character; there is nothing marked in its lines. And as to smaller-sized rooms than I had been used
to, I really could not give it a thought. He scarcely ever spoke to
her; and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of
himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose
civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and
especially to her friend. Her way was clear, though not quite
smooth.—She spoke then, on being so entreated.—What did she say?—Just
what she ought, of course. had it, by
any blessed felicity, occurred to her, to institute the comparison.—She
saw that there never had been a time when she did not consider Mr. Restless and dissatisfied
every where, her sister could never obtain her opinion of any article
of purchase, however it might equally concern them both: she received
no pleasure from anything; was only impatient to be at home again, and
could with difficulty govern her vexation at the tediousness of Mrs. Mrs. Emma listened with the warmest concern;
grieved for her more and more, and looked around eager to discover some
way of being useful. Elton,
who might marry any body! Indeed, Mr. Jennings; “very pretty, indeed! At her age she
can have no experience, and with her little wit, is not very likely
ever to have any that can avail her. Churchill, after being disliked at least twenty-five years, was
now spoken of with compassionate allowances. She had been for three months her companion, was
still under her care, and she was known to have been greatly injured,
and long unhappy. Darcy of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with
propriety in a different manner. Oh yes! The lane made a slight bend; and when that bend was
passed, Mr. Let me thank you again and again,
in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced
you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the
sake of discovering them.”

“If you _will_ thank me,” he replied, “let it be for yourself alone. Instead of forgetting
him, his behaviour was such that she could not avoid the internal
suggestion of “Can it really be as my brother imagined? Martin is not very, very bitterly disappointed.”

“A man cannot be more so,” was his short, full answer. I had no hesitation in advising him to marry. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
people, he knew, but _he_ had never seen anything but affability in her. Mrs. But in every respect,
as she saw more of her, she approved her, and was confirmed in all her
kind designs. CHAPTER XXIX. I flatter myself, at least, that you will
be able to do so. Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on
Mrs. But there
are two things that I want very much to know:--one is, how much money
your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how I am ever
to pay him.”

“Money! But
just got acquainted with Mrs. Weston gave
Emma a look of particular meaning. I have just received my
dispatches, and taken my farewell of Allenham; and by way of
exhilaration I am now come to take my farewell of you.”

“To London!—and are you going this morning?”

“Almost this moment.”

“This is very unfortunate. Knightley used even to the woman he was in love
with, how to be able to ask her to marry him, without attacking the
happiness of her father. Jones says we must not think of moving her. I dared not address her openly; my
difficulties in the then state of Enscombe must be too well known to
require definition; and I was fortunate enough to prevail, before we
parted at Weymouth, and to induce the most upright female mind in the
creation to stoop in charity to a secret engagement.—Had she refused, I
should have gone mad.—But you will be ready to say, what was your hope
in doing this?—What did you look forward to?—To any thing, every
thing—to time, chance, circumstance, slow effects, sudden bursts,
perseverance and weariness, health and sickness. But (with a reproachful smile at Emma) she receives attentions
from Mrs. I am not fond of
nettles or thistles, or heath blossoms. As he became rational, he
ought to have roused himself and shaken off all that was unworthy in
their authority. the pains I have been at to
dispel those gloomy ideas and give him cheerfuller views! Knightley,” said Emma, trying to be lively, but really confused—“I
am in a very extraordinary situation. I must confess myself
     surprised by your application; I did not expect it from _you_. Dashwood’s happening
to mention her design of improving the cottage in the spring, he warmly
opposed every alteration of a place which affection had established as
perfect with him. With all my heart. Frank Churchill to be making such a speech as that to
the uncle and aunt, who have brought him up, and are to provide for
him!—Standing up in the middle of the room, I suppose, and speaking as
loud as he could!—How can you imagine such conduct practicable?”

“Depend upon it, Emma, a sensible man would find no difficulty in it. She had
spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with
Charlotte, and the kind attention she had received, must make _her_ feel
the obliged. We must not expect a lively young man
to be always so guarded and circumspect. But he is not the
only gentleman you have been lately used to. Bennet, have you no more lanes
hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?”

“I advise Mr. Her daughter did not
look, however, as if much of it were heard by her. Mrs. If you love Mr. “I am afraid Jane is not very well,” said she, “but I do not know; they
_tell_ me she is well. Goddard? I have business there; from thence to town in a day
or two. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XV. Marianne said not a word.—She trembled, her eyes were fixed on the
ground, and her lips became whiter than even sickness had left them. Had he done his duty in that
respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of
honour or credit could now be purchased for her. Weston told me you were here.—Oh! Harriet was one of those, who, having once begun, would be always
in love. I am sure he has not the
least idea of it. Would Jane but go, means were to be found, servants sent, friends
contrived—no travelling difficulty allowed to exist; but still she had
declined it! Woodhouse—how was Mr. I am so
grieved for him. no—a very bad plan. But really, I could almost venture,
if Harriet would sit to me. And besides all this, I am
afraid, Mama, he has no real taste. The lady is the Hon. oh! He would soon be among
them again; Mr. The
subject was pursued no further, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went
away. Woodhouse see no objection, and I trust you
cannot, my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him
there. We can all
_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there are
very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without
encouragement. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that
they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a
return. Wickham’s happiness and her own was perforce
delayed a little longer, and Mr. It seems an impossibility!—You cannot mean to say,
that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin. [Illustration:

The arrival of the
Gardiners
]




CHAPTER XLII. Indeed I must
say that, much as I had heard of him before and much as I had expected,
he very far exceeds any thing.... Weston was convinced that such conversation must be the greatest relief
to her companion, pent up within her own mind as every thing had so
long been, and was very much pleased with all that she had said on the
subject. You will know it all in
time. Till yesterday, I believe, she never doubted his regard;
and even now, perhaps—but _I_ am almost convinced that he never was
really attached to her. He
was a nervous man, easily depressed; fond of every body that he was
used to, and hating to part with them; hating change of every kind. Long and the Gouldings soon. Whether it was his own idea you know, one
cannot tell. Darcy may,
perhaps, have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he
would hardly think a month’s ablution enough to cleanse him from its
impurities, were he once to enter it; and, depend upon it, Mr. Bennet, accompanied by her
two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast. Cruel, cruel—nothing can acquit you. Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. He called it, therefore, his duty to step
     forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on
     by himself. I really
could not help exclaiming! Elizabeth blushed and
blushed again with shame and vexation. They repulsed
every attempt of Mrs. So sudden!—You may guess, dear Miss Woodhouse,
what a flurry it has thrown me in! Well, he certainly is
very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. Emma was
not sorry to have such an opportunity of survey; and walking a few
yards forward, while they talked together, soon made her quick eye
sufficiently acquainted with Mr. that I had been satisfied with persuading her
not to accept young Martin. He owed a good deal in the
town, but his debts of honour were still more formidable. When Mr. Hill and the two housemaids. Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of
the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the
writer, that could give her any comfort. In my eyes it would be
no marriage at all, but that would be nothing. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on
his side even more. Bennet had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an
hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how
heartily they were wished away by some of the family. There
is a littleness about him which you discovered, and which I did not:
and I was fully convinced of his being in love with Harriet. At length, however, the question was
asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs. Knightley.’ I will
not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs. Mr. He
bore it with noble indifference; and she would have imagined that
Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes
likewise turned towards Mr. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect
him here soon. If it be so, if I have been misled
by such error to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been
unreasonable. Have I been
rightly informed? “A family cannot well be maintained on a smaller. Graham’s intending to have a bailiff
from Scotland, to look after his new estate. The old gentleman died: his will was read, and like almost every other
will, gave as much disappointment as pleasure. After a good many compliments to Jane on her dress
and look, compliments very quietly and properly taken, Mrs. Martin is nothing more,) a good match for my intimate
friend! Mr. I am monstrous glad of it, for then I shall
have her for a neighbour you know.”

“Upon my word,” replied Elinor, “you know much more of the matter than
I do, if you have any reason to expect such a match.”

“Don’t pretend to deny it, because you know it is what every body talks
of. Did not you observe her manner of
answering me? Tell me what
it is, explain the grounds on which you acted, and I shall be
satisfied, in being able to satisfy you. Poor
little Emma! She might do very well by herself. Were I to fall
in love, indeed, it would be a different thing! The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had
produced, of what Mr. But while she
wondered at the difference of the two young men, she did not find that
the emptiness and conceit of the one, put her out of all charity with
the modesty and worth of the other. Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight, that her mother felt
it no longer necessary to give up the whole of her time to her; and,
contenting herself with visiting her once or twice a day, returned from
that period to her own home, and her own habits, in which she found the
Miss Dashwoods very ready to resume their former share. Any
other situation would have been much less in character. My dear, did you change your stockings?”

“Yes, sir, I did indeed; and I am very much obliged by your kind
solicitude about me.”

“My dear Miss Fairfax, young ladies are very sure to be cared for.—I
hope your good grand-mama and aunt are well. It is impossible to refuse what
you ask in such a way. Mrs. The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly
what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Poor man!—it was at first a considerable shock to him, and he tried
earnestly to dissuade her from it. No, if he had believed
me at all to share his feelings, he would not have been so wretched. And, by the bye, every
body ought to have two pair of spectacles; they should indeed. Dashwood, so we shall
be a good deal in Harley Street, I dare say, and Edward spends half his
time with his sister—besides, Lady Middleton and Mrs. There was something in her style of beauty, to please them
particularly. Altogether, they will have
five hundred a-year amongst them, and what on earth can four women want
for more than that?—They will live so cheap! Bennet’s invention was again at work to get
everybody away from him and her daughter. It was made a great favour of; and
altogether it was more than I could bear; and so I never would finish
it, to have it apologised over as an unfavourable likeness, to every
morning visitor in Brunswick Square;—and, as I said, I did then
forswear ever drawing any body again. Knightley. Her
present home, he could not but observe, was unfavourable to a nervous
disorder:—confined always to one room;—he could have wished it
otherwise—and her good aunt, though his very old friend, he must
acknowledge to be not the best companion for an invalid of that
description. “Well, then, when will you come back again?”

“I hope we shall see you at Barton,” added her ladyship, “as soon as
you can conveniently leave town; and we must put off the party to
Whitwell till you return.”

“You are very obliging. She did not always
feel so absolutely satisfied with herself, so entirely convinced that
her opinions were right and her adversary’s wrong, as Mr. Jennings’s engagements kept her from home. Darcy! Such an adventure as this,—a fine young man and a lovely young woman
thrown together in such a way, could hardly fail of suggesting certain
ideas to the coldest heart and the steadiest brain. Collins was eloquent in her praise. You wrote me word of it three months ago.”

“Me! For his own sake, I would not
have him do so mad a thing.”

“Imprudent, if you please—but not mad. Hurst was observing their game. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Kitty, a fair but frozen maid. Her inviting you to town is certainly a
vast thing in your favour; and indeed, it speaks altogether so great a
regard for you, that in all probability when she dies you will not be
forgotten. Churchill, oh! such delicacy!—and yet
without being actually fair.—One cannot call her fair. Darcy often acknowledged himself to
be under the greatest obligations to my father’s active superintendence;
and when, immediately before my father’s death, Mr. The clouds seem
parting too, the sun will be out in a moment, and we shall have a clear
afternoon.”

Elinor was alternately diverted and pained; but Marianne persevered,
and saw every night in the brightness of the fire, and every morning in
the appearance of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of approaching
frost. _Then_ she fell into hysterics again, and he was so frightened that he
would send for Mr. What is it about? John Dashwood—_that_ must be recommendation enough to
her husband.”

“But Mrs. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any
revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering. Sure you do not mean to persuade me that the
Colonel only marries you for the sake of giving ten guineas to Mr. That I should ever have meant more you will allow to be
    impossible, when you understand that my affections have been long
    engaged elsewhere, and it will not be many weeks, I believe, before
    this engagement is fulfilled. “But, my dear Elizabeth,” she added, “what sort of girl is Miss King? I was sixteen years old when
you were born.”

“A material difference then,” she replied—“and no doubt you were much
my superior in judgment at that period of our lives; but does not the
lapse of one-and-twenty years bring our understandings a good deal
nearer?”

“Yes—a good deal _nearer_.”

“But still, not near enough to give me a chance of being right, if we
think differently.”

“I have still the advantage of you by sixteen years’ experience, and by
not being a pretty young woman and a spoiled child. Can not we be gone
to-morrow?”

“To-morrow, Marianne!”

“Yes, why should I stay here? what has she to do with it? You want nothing but
patience—or give it a more fascinating name, call it hope. She was stronger alone, and her own good
sense so well supported her, that her firmness was as unshaken, her
appearance of cheerfulness as invariable, as with regrets so poignant
and so fresh, it was possible for them to be. But there is one comfort, my dear Miss Marianne; he is not the
only young man in the world worth having; and with your pretty face you
will never want admirers. And now, Miss
Woodhouse, I do not think I shall mind seeing them again. “If she had not known him to be in town she would not
have written to him, as she did; she would have written to Combe Magna;
and if he is in town, how odd that he should neither come nor write! “But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,” replied
her uncle. You cannot be
ignorant, Mrs. Weston, and
had half a mind to take it up; but she struggled, and let it pass. Weston, she found herself abruptly addressed
with,

“Do not you think, Miss Woodhouse, our saucy little friend here is
charmingly recovered?—Do not you think her cure does Perry the highest
credit?—(here was a side-glance of great meaning at Jane.) Upon my
word, Perry has restored her in a wonderful short time!—Oh! Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy
was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the
while. The separation
between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. She touched—she admitted—she
acknowledged the whole truth. That he was _surprised_ by the
connection was evident: he sustained it, however, with fortitude: and,
so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into
conversation with Mr. She is loveliness itself. How could she deny that
credit to his assertions, in one instance, which she had been obliged to
give in the other? Emma
thought with pleasure of some change of subject. We passed each other
several times. Elton was
evidently wanting to be complimented herself—and it was, “How do you
like my gown?—How do you like my trimming?—How has Wright done my
hair?”—with many other relative questions, all answered with patient
politeness. Elton, no doubt; accomplished enough for
Highbury—handsome enough—to look plain, probably, by Harriet’s side. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted
by the Gardiners and Jane; but, as he took up his abode with the
Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Jeffereys—Clara Partridge, that was—and of the two
Milmans, now Mrs. Just the kind of girl I should suppose likely
to captivate poor Edward. His abilities in every
respect improve as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person. Her care and attention could not be questioned; they were,
in fact, only too great. This is a sort of dull-looking evening, that ought to be treated
rather as winter than summer. Mrs. I do not know who would ever look
at him in the company of the other. It will
be the only difference.”

“Poor child!” cried Emma; “at that rate, what will become of her?”

“Nothing very bad.—The fate of thousands. She moved away and sat down. _I_ did for you. Elton appeared to her on this second interview, such she appeared
whenever they met again,—self-important, presuming, familiar, ignorant,
and ill-bred. On their return from the park they found Willoughby’s curricle and
servant in waiting at the cottage, and Mrs. Smallridge’s situation, she
had come to the resolution of accepting it.—I did not know a word of it
till it was all settled.”

“You spent the evening with Mrs. Disingenuousness and double dealing seemed
to meet him at every turn. You take
delight in vexing me. Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth;
and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _knew_ that she was happy
than _felt_ herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment,
there were other evils before her. He seemed by this connexion between the
families, quite to belong to her. She
introduced him to her friend, Miss Smith, and, at convenient moments
afterwards, heard what each thought of the other. Poor Mr. ‘Oh!’ said I, ‘it is Miss
Woodhouse: I am sure you will like to see her.’—‘I can see nobody,’
said she; and up she got, and would go away; and that was what made us
keep you waiting—and extremely sorry and ashamed we were. From their infancy,
they have been intended for each other. The
happiness which this reply produced was such as he had probably never
felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as
warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. How Mr. If you were to see them at the altar, you
would suppose they were going to be married. [Illustration:

“The efforts of his aunt”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER LVIII. “That may
be done without horses. It originated in
Mrs. Elton.”

He had done his duty and could return to his son. ma’am, but there may be a difficulty. Mr. “You owe me no apologies; and every body to whom you
might be supposed to owe them, is so perfectly satisfied, so delighted
even—”

“You are very kind, but I know what my manners were to you.—So cold and
artificial!—I had always a part to act.—It was a life of deceit!—I know
that I must have disgusted you.”

“Pray say no more. When is she dejected or melancholy? What nonsense one talks, Miss Woodhouse, when hard at
work, if one talks at all;—your real workmen, I suppose, hold their
tongues; but we gentlemen labourers if we get hold of a word—Miss
Fairfax said something about conjecturing. Emma could have wished Mrs. Poor Miss Bates may very
likely have committed her niece and hurried her into a greater
appearance of intimacy than her own good sense would have dictated, in
spite of the very natural wish of a little change.”

Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again; and after a few
minutes silence, he said,

“Another thing must be taken into consideration too—Mrs. Harriet, Harriet, do not deceive
yourself; do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion. How much of good
or evil must be done by him! _She_ certainly had not been
in the wrong, and _he_ would never own that he had. Mr. Gardiner added, in his letter, that they might expect to see their
father at home on the following day, which was Saturday. One says those sort of things, of course, without
any idea of a serious meaning. What could be the meaning of it? My uncle has been too good for me to
encroach.—I must still add to this long letter. Weston, kind-hearted and musical, was particularly interested by
the circumstance, and Emma could not help being amused at her
perseverance in dwelling on the subject; and having so much to ask and
to say as to tone, touch, and pedal, totally unsuspicious of that wish
of saying as little about it as possible, which she plainly read in the
fair heroine’s countenance. Collins was wishing to marry you. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry,
and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms. Darcy.”

“He likes to have his own way very well,” replied Colonel Fitzwilliam. Philips’s. Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. Knightley. “She was determined to drop
his acquaintance immediately, and she was very thankful that she had
never been acquainted with him at all. Emma
thought at least it would turn out so. Besides, if she does play so very well, you
know, it is no more than she is obliged to do, because she will have to
teach. About a mile and a half from the cottage, along the narrow winding
valley of Allenham, which issued from that of Barton, as formerly
described, the girls had, in one of their earliest walks, discovered an
ancient respectable looking mansion which, by reminding them a little
of Norland, interested their imagination and made them wish to be
better acquainted with it. Let us forgive each other at once. Weston said no more; and Emma could imagine with what surprize and
mortification she must be returning to her seat. “Do not you want to know who has taken it?” cried his wife, impatiently. Long and her nieces must stand their chance; and, therefore,
as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I
will take it on myself.”

The girls stared at their father. Palmer’s side that constant and friendly
good humour could do, to make them feel themselves welcome. My Elinor, you do not yet know all my happiness. How, where, when?—Let me know it all. Elinor, who foresaw a
fairer opening for the point she had in view, in such a party as this
was likely to be, more at liberty among themselves under the tranquil
and well-bred direction of Lady Middleton than when her husband united
them together in one noisy purpose, immediately accepted the
invitation; Margaret, with her mother’s permission, was equally
compliant, and Marianne, though always unwilling to join any of their
parties, was persuaded by her mother, who could not bear to have her
seclude herself from any chance of amusement, to go likewise. They were a couple worth looking at. Darcy’s
regard.”

“Mr. Palmer were of the party; from the former, whom they had
not seen before since their arrival in town, as he was careful to avoid
the appearance of any attention to his mother-in-law, and therefore
never came near her, they received no mark of recognition on their
entrance. A complete change of life became desirable. Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them: anything was a
welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. But, unfortunately—in short, if your
compassion does not stand my friend—”

“Oh! Marianne’s performance was highly applauded. Aye, I remember it all now; all, except your saving this
relic—I knew nothing of that till this moment—but the cutting the
finger, and my recommending court-plaister, and saying I had none about
me!—Oh! Weston arrived, Emma had the perusal of it; and
she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which made her at
first shake her head over her own sensations, and think she had
undervalued their strength. His present pursuit could not make him forget that
Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the
first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner
of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of what
she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their
opinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, there
was a solicitude, an interest, which she felt must ever attach her to
him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced, that,
whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable
and pleasing. The danger would have been
of my wearying you. He
wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration
should _now_ escape him--nothing that could elevate her with the hope of
influencing his felicity; sensible that, if such an idea had been
suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight
in confirming or crushing it. Knightley, always so kind, so feeling, so truly
considerate for every body, would never deserve to be less worshipped
than now; and it really was too much to hope even of Harriet, that she
could be in love with more than _three_ men in one year. But I have
just left Marianne in bed, and, I hope, almost asleep; and as I think
nothing will be of so much service to her as rest, if you will give me
leave, I will drink the wine myself.”

Mrs. Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much
struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he
might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast parlour
at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much
gratification; but when Mrs. But, my
     dear sister, though the event has proved you right, do not think me
     obstinate if I still assert that, considering what her behaviour
     was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. She could not be silent when such points were introduced, and
she had neither shyness nor reserve in their discussion. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion
that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. Knightley’s most liberal supply. Seats tolerably in the shade were found; and now Emma was obliged to
overhear what Mrs. The important Tuesday came that was to introduce the two young ladies
to this formidable mother-in-law. John Dashwood to the
good opinion of Lady Middleton did not suit the fancy of Mrs. Her income was not her
own, she said, with such perpetual claims on it; and it was the more
unkind in my father, because, otherwise, the money would have been
entirely at my mother’s disposal, without any restriction whatever. While they are with us, we shall explore a great deal, I
dare say. His character was to
     speak for itself. Weston is so
anxious to be acquainted with him, that she must be almost as happy as
yourself.”

“Yes, she would be, but that she thinks there will be another put-off. It is a match that must give universal satisfaction. Mr. Perhaps it will be
wisest in you to check your feelings while you can: at any rate do not
let them carry you far, unless you are persuaded of his liking you. Bingley, and a charming prospect
over that gravel walk. Henry Dashwood, the legal
inheritor of the Norland estate, and the person to whom he intended to
bequeath it. Cole had heard from Mr. Perhaps she ought to be ashamed, but Mr. The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the
entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the
finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many a
significant look and smile from Mrs. “Very well indeed!—how prettily she writes!—aye, that was quite proper
to let him be off if he would. Jennings, one so earnestly
grateful, so full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own
heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and bidding
Colonel Brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend, was carefully
assisted by him into the carriage, of which he seemed anxious that she
should engross at least half. But
from such vain wishes she was forced to turn for comfort to the renewal
of her confidence in Edward’s affection, to the remembrance of every
mark of regard in look or word which fell from him while at Barton, and
above all to that flattering proof of it which he constantly wore round
his finger. Heaven forbid! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! You must know I have a vast dislike to puppies—quite a horror of them. I dare say there was a difference when I was staying with them
the other day. Your father was gone, your
     uncle at home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk
     together. With a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired to her room on
leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee. “Your sister,” said he, with abruptness, a moment afterwards—“is out of
danger. “About a month,” said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject
drop, added, “he is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I
understand.”

“Yes,” replied Wickham; “his estate there is a noble one. Invite him to dinner, Emma, and help him to the best of the fish
and the chicken, but leave him to chuse his own wife. Mr. She tried to explain the real
state of the case to her sister. She was of great use and comfort to us all, and Lady
Lucas has been very kind: she walked here on Wednesday morning to
condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters, if
they could be of use to us.”

“She had better have stayed at home,” cried Elizabeth: “perhaps she
_meant_ well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too
little of one’s neighbours. I
could suppose she might in time—but can she already?—Did not you
misunderstand him?—You were both talking of other things; of business,
shows of cattle, or new drills—and might not you, in the confusion of
so many subjects, mistake him?—It was not Harriet’s hand that he was
certain of—it was the dimensions of some famous ox.”

The contrast between the countenance and air of Mr. Mr. It is on your account that he has been
so frequently invited this week. You will never recommend yourself to his friend by
so doing.”

Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. You have liked many a
stupider person.”

“Dear Lizzy!”

“Oh, you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general. The cold insolence of Mrs. only think. Jennings
returned, she continued on the bed quiet and motionless. Any nonsense will serve. She is a woman that one may, that one _must_
laugh at; but that one would not wish to slight. Wickham with money.”

“Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right; who should do it but
her own uncle? She had dressed with more than
usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all
that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than
might be won in the course of the evening. I think he is just the person
to do it, even without being in love.”

“Then it can be no argument to prove that he is in love. After a proper resistance on the part of Mrs. Who makes you their confidant?”

Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr. Dixon does not seem in the least backward in any attention. Palmer excessively. [Illustration:

                                  THE
                                  END
                                   ]




             CHISWICK PRESS:--CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO. you are what you always were!”

She paused—no one spoke. She hardly wished to have more
leisure for them. “I do not wonder, Miss Woodhouse,” she resumed, “that you should feel a
great difference between the two, as to me or as to any body. It was better to pay
my visit, then”—

He hesitated, got up, walked to a window. She was answered in the
negative. “Being my
friend’s, I have no right to expose it in any degree to the public eye,
but perhaps you may not dislike looking at it.”

The speech was more to Emma than to Harriet, which Emma could
understand. “A man who
has nothing to do with his own time has no conscience in his intrusion
on that of others.”

The event proved her conjecture right, though it was founded on
injustice and error; for Colonel Brandon _did_ come in; and Elinor, who
was convinced that solicitude for Marianne brought him thither, and who
saw _that_ solicitude in his disturbed and melancholy look, and in his
anxious though brief inquiry after her, could not forgive her sister
for esteeming him so lightly. I hope my mother is now convinced that I have no more talents than
inclination for a public life!”

“But how is your fame to be established? Jennings
would have persuaded her, at its conclusion, to take some rest before
her mother’s arrival, and allow _her_ to take her place by Marianne;
but Elinor had no sense of fatigue, no capability of sleep at that
moment about her, and she was not to be kept away from her sister an
unnecessary instant. And you can be always
with me. Weston, “one could know which arrangement our
guests in general would like best. Dixon, a young man, rich and agreeable, almost as
soon as they were acquainted; and was eligibly and happily settled,
while Jane Fairfax had yet her bread to earn. The
carriage—we had disappointments about the carriage;—one morning, I
remember, he came to me quite in despair.”

She was stopped by a slight fit of coughing, and Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. Frosts
will soon set in, and in all probability with severity. I hoped to find you
reasonable; but depend upon it I will carry my point.”

In this manner Lady Catherine talked on till they were at the door of
the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added,--

“I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. She was quite determined not to utter a word that should
hurt Jane Fairfax’s feelings; and they followed the other ladies out of
the room, arm in arm, with an appearance of good-will highly becoming
to the beauty and grace of each. Disappointed, however,
and vexed as she was, and sometimes displeased with his uncertain
behaviour to herself, she was very well disposed on the whole to regard
his actions with all the candid allowances and generous qualifications,
which had been rather more painfully extorted from her, for
Willoughby’s service, by her mother. Woodhouse’s feelings were in sad warfare. The young ladies of Highbury might have
walked again in safety before their panic began, and the whole history
dwindled soon into a matter of little importance but to Emma and her
nephews:—in her imagination it maintained its ground, and Henry and
John were still asking every day for the story of Harriet and the
gipsies, and still tenaciously setting her right if she varied in the
slightest particular from the original recital. Stupid men are the only ones
worth knowing, after all.”

“Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.”

Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the
unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in
a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer. It was then disclosed in the following
manner. Knightley, and so you actually saw the letter; well—”

“It was short—merely to announce—but cheerful, exulting, of course.”—
Here was a sly glance at Emma. Before the middle of the day, they were visited by Sir John and Mrs. Weston laughed, and said he did not know what he was talking
about. But now I seem to feel that I may
deserve him; and that if he does chuse me, it will not be any thing so
very wonderful.”

The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech, the many bitter
feelings, made the utmost exertion necessary on Emma’s side, to enable
her to say on reply,

“Harriet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr. Knightley at a little distance, and was arranging
himself for settled conversation, while smiles of high glee passed
between him and his wife. It is a very
cold afternoon—but in this carriage we know nothing of the matter.—Ha! He was under my
uncle’s care, you know, a considerable while.”

“Your uncle!”

“Yes; Mr. He has always something to say to everybody. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse
with Rosings. Martin; but, as I said before, are
unjust to Harriet. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend
was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their
meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she
saw Mr. Relate only what in your conscience you think necessary for me to
hear.”

“Marianne’s note, by assuring me that I was still as dear to her as in
former days,—that in spite of the many, many weeks we had been
separated, she was as constant in her own feelings, and as full of
faith in the constancy of mine as ever,—awakened all my remorse. And is it really true? By you, I was properly humbled. Churchill, it would be most natural,
that while she makes no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband, to
whom she owes every thing, while she exercises incessant caprice
towards _him_, she should frequently be governed by the nephew, to whom
she owes nothing at all.”

“My dearest Emma, do not pretend, with your sweet temper, to understand
a bad one, or to lay down rules for it: you must let it go its own way. Knightley, Mr. A few minutes
more, and Emma hoped to see one troublesome companion deposited in his
own house, to get sober and cool, and the other recover his temper and
happiness when this visit of hardship were over. And if you will
stay another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to take one of you
as far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and
as Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good
room for one of you--and, indeed, if the weather should happen to be
cool, I should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you
large.”

“You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our
original plan.”

Lady Catherine seemed resigned. are my ideas so
scanty? I was sure you could not
be so beautiful for nothing! At last she recollected that
she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dovedale with
great perseverance. Dullness is as much produced within doors as
without, by rain. Had he ever been in the way of learning, I think he would
have drawn very well. We are growing a little too nice. Yes, we _do_ know it all. Churchill to urge his nephew’s
instant return. Collins has yet
expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very
certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for
it. As it was certain, however, that
somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid
the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the
shrubbery. Their hours were therefore made over
to Lady Middleton and the two Miss Steeles, by whom their company, in
fact was as little valued, as it was professedly sought. “Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, “is
one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other
sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I daresay, it
succeeds; but, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.”

“Undoubtedly,” replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,
“there is meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescend
to employ for captivation. Elizabeth was in agonies. Such
squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity
are not worth a regret. Since the death of her husband, who
had traded with success in a less elegant part of the town, she had
resided every winter in a house in one of the streets near Portman
Square. Weston, I am not to be talked out of my dislike of
Harriet Smith, or my dread of its doing them both harm.”

“And I, Mr. Smith?”

“She taxed me with the offence at once, and my confusion may be
guessed. I shall not
attempt calling on Mrs. “The Churchills are very likely in fault,” said Mr. How do you all do?—Quite well, I am much obliged to you. She restrained herself, however, from any of the reproofs she could
have given, and only thanked Mrs. At
present I have not room to do them justice.”

“Oh, it is of no consequence. Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only _child_),
I was spoiled by my parents, who, though good themselves, (my father
particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable,) allowed, encouraged,
almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing, to care for none beyond
my own family circle, to think meanly of all the rest of the world, to
_wish_ at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with
my own. Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern in
missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Bates and Miss Fairfax are—”

“Very well, I am much obliged to you. Knightley was fortunate in every body’s most ready concurrence. “I am very sure
that I never said any thing of either to the other, which both might
not have heard.”

“You are in luck.—Your only blunder was confined to my ear, when you
imagined a certain friend of ours in love with the lady.”

“True. It
has given me such an abhorrence of annuities, that I am sure I would
not pin myself down to the payment of one for all the world.”

“It is certainly an unpleasant thing,” replied Mr. It is very often nothing but
our own vanity that deceives us. Weston was surprized and
sorry; but then he began to perceive that Frank’s coming two or three
months later would be a much better plan; better time of year; better
weather; and that he would be able, without any doubt, to stay
considerably longer with them than if he had come sooner. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her
drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. You
_can_ have no grief.”

“I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state.”

“And you will never see me otherwise. Jennings, and in a determined silence when obliged to
endure it. Dixon, perhaps, had been very near changing one friend for the other,
or been fixed only to Miss Campbell, for the sake of the future twelve
thousand pounds. Indeed, when the time draws on, I shall decidedly
recommend their bringing the barouche-landau; it will be so very much
preferable. I gave him
a lock of my hair set in a ring when he was at Longstaple last, and
that was some comfort to him, he said, but not equal to a picture. A clear ten
thousand per annum. They were both in ecstasies. Emma encouraged her
talkativeness—amused by such a picture of another set of beings, and
enjoying the youthful simplicity which could speak with so much
exultation of Mrs. I should be very
glad to get her so good a mistress. That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a
ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate. [Illustration]

When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
her praise of Mr. What congratulations will
then flow in! There is to be
no form or parade—a sort of gipsy party. The introduction
was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation--a
readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the
whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably,
when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were
seen riding down the street. In future, I hope we shall be always of one
mind.”

She held out her hand: he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though
he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house. Weston. I am sure you will be glad to hear, as likewise dear Mrs. I think you will agree with me,
(turning with a soft air to Emma,) I think I shall certainly have your
approbation, though Mr. The reason alleged was their
determined resolution of not leaving their mother at that time of the
year. Well, any friend of
Mr. His want of spirits, of openness,
and of consistency, were most usually attributed to his want of
independence, and his better knowledge of Mrs. Knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in the shade. Why don’t he, in such a case, sell his horses, let his house,
turn off his servants, and make a thorough reform at once? And Elinor, in quitting
Norland and Edward, cried not as I did. A very desirable
connection on both sides, and I have not a doubt of its taking place in
time. Knightley. Everything
that is charming! From the expense of the child, however, he was soon relieved. Weston; and she
perceived that his wife, who was standing immediately above her, was
not only listening also, but even encouraging him by significant
glances.—The kind-hearted, gentle Mrs. The very mention of
anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour, and
wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. May be
she is ill in town; nothing in the world more likely, for I have a
notion she is always rather sickly. Is she said to be
amiable?”

“I never heard any harm of her; indeed I hardly ever heard her
mentioned; except that Mrs. Cole’s; and without being able to forget that among the failings of Mr. No, the young lady, to be sure. Within a
fortnight. Upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright. He had walked up one day after dinner, as he very often did, to spend
his evening at Hartfield. She wished
to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, “This must be false! Your friend Harriet will make a much longer
history when you see her.—She will give you all the minute particulars,
which only woman’s language can make interesting.—In our communications
we deal only in the great.—However, I must say, that Robert Martin’s
heart seemed for _him_, and to _me_, very overflowing; and that he did
mention, without its being much to the purpose, that on quitting their
box at Astley’s, my brother took charge of Mrs. This was a
device, I suppose, to sport with my curiosity, and exercise my talent
of guessing. Goddard’s, had written
out at least three hundred; and Harriet, who had taken the first hint
of it from her, hoped, with Miss Woodhouse’s help, to get a great many
more. Elizabeth listened with
delight to the happy though modest hopes which Jane entertained of
Bingley’s regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence
in it. Mr. If, however, I am allowed to
think that you and yours feel an interest in my fate and actions, it
may be the means—it may put me on my guard—at least, it may be
something to live for. I wonder who first
discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!”

“I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love,” said Darcy. Oh! As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its
contents. He placed himself by her. I hope you will be a great deal at
Combe Magna. Jennings was so far from being weary of her guests, that she
pressed them very earnestly to return with her again from Cleveland. The ladies had not been long in the drawing-room, before the other
ladies, in their different divisions, arrived. The family were assembled in the breakfast-room to receive
them. It is too ridiculous! It soon flies over the present failure,
and begins to hope again. and Mrs. Perry was an intelligent, gentlemanlike man, whose frequent visits were
one of the comforts of Mr. Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the
eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been
heard of the fugitives. “Do come now,” said he—“pray come—you must come—I declare you shall
come—You can’t think how you will like them. Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits of this arrangement,
and seemed most fully to appreciate the blessing of having two months
before him of such near neighbourhood to many dear friends—for the
house was taken for May and June. A mind like hers, once
opening to suspicion, made rapid progress. But when they see,
as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will
learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again: though we
can never be what we once were to each other.”

“That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I ever
heard you utter. “No. She had often observed the change, to
almost the same extent.—Harriet repeated expressions of approbation and
praise from him—and Emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with
what she had known of his opinion of Harriet. “Yours, etc.”

“Well, my dear,” said Mr. and Mrs. She was proved to have been universally mistaken;
and she had not quite done nothing—for she had done mischief. Will you? Woodhouse came in, and very soon led to the subject again, by the
recurrence of his very frequent inquiry of “Well, my dears, how does
your book go on?—Have you got any thing fresh?”

“Yes, papa; we have something to read you, something quite fresh. Miss Woodhouse, believe me I have not the presumption to suppose—
Indeed I am not so mad.—But it is a pleasure to me to admire him at a
distance—and to think of his infinite superiority to all the rest of
the world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration, which are so
proper, in me especially.”

“I am not at all surprized at you, Harriet. Weston, with triumph of a different sort, was confessing that he
had known it to be snowing some time, but had not said a word, lest it
should make Mr. Lucy became as necessary to Mrs. I cannot think of it.—It won’t
do.—Then came your dear mother to torture me farther, with all her
kindness and confidence. Mr. She will enjoy the scheme, I am sure; and I do not know a
properer person for shewing us how to do away difficulties. At present, there was nothing to be done for
Harriet; good wishes for the future were all that could yet be possible
on Emma’s side. The housekeeper
at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her
master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several
weeks. Has not my consent been
daily asked by his looks, his manner, his attentive and affectionate
respect? Anxiety on Jane’s behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. I could rather believe
every creature of my acquaintance leagued together to ruin me in his
opinion, than believe his nature capable of such cruelty. Willoughby, she
would have thought herself amply rewarded for the sacrifice of the best
place by the fire after dinner, which their arrival occasioned. Darcy just deigned to return. how
would she have behaved?” were the questions with which she amused
herself. Mr. I went in for three minutes, and was detained
by Miss Bates’s being absent. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. They are to be new set. As to men and women, our opinions are sometimes very different;
but with regard to these children, I observe we never disagree.”

“If you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of men and
women, and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your dealings
with them, as you are where these children are concerned, we might
always think alike.”

“To be sure—our discordancies must always arise from my being in the
wrong.”

“Yes,” said he, smiling—“and reason good. Knightley, are you
perfectly sure that she has absolutely and downright _accepted_ him. “While Mary is adjusting her ideas,” he continued, “let us return to Mr. Jennings joined them soon after they
entered the Gardens, and Elinor was not sorry that by her continuing
with them, and engaging all Mrs. But I have
other provocations. Somebody else believed _Mrs_. She was calm,
except when she thought of her mother; but she was almost hopeless; and
in this state she continued till noon, scarcely stirring from her
sister’s bed, her thoughts wandering from one image of grief, one
suffering friend to another, and her spirits oppressed to the utmost by
the conversation of Mrs. Mrs. Bingley, if he _had been_ imposed on, would have much to suffer when
the affair became public. Darcy, may be
guessed. Elton was to go, and never had
his broad handsome face expressed more pleasure than at this moment;
never had his smile been stronger, nor his eyes more exulting than when
he next looked at her. I do assure you that I am not
one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so
daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second
time. Perhaps you might notice the ring when you saw him?”

“I did,” said Elinor, with a composure of voice, under which was
concealed an emotion and distress beyond any thing she had ever felt
before. Remember me kindly to her. From that moment I
observed my friend’s behaviour attentively; and I could then perceive
that his partiality for Miss Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed
in him. She calls me dear
Mrs. Oh, my
dear Lizzy! But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their own
arrival at Lambton these visitors came. Mrs. The officer was the very
Mr. E.,’ I often say, ‘rather you than I.—I do not
know what would become of my crayons and my instrument, if I had half
so many applicants.’—Bad enough as it is, for I absolutely neglect them
both to an unpardonable degree.—I believe I have not played a bar this
fortnight.—However, he is coming, I assure you: yes, indeed, on purpose
to wait on you all.” And putting up her hand to screen her words from
Emma—“A congratulatory visit, you know.—Oh! I cannot doubt it. Elton’s marrying, Harriet, is the strongest reproach you can make _me_. The charming Augusta Hawkins, in addition to all the usual advantages
of perfect beauty and merit, was in possession of an independent
fortune, of so many thousands as would always be called ten; a point of
some dignity, as well as some convenience: the story told well; he had
not thrown himself away—he had gained a woman of 10,000 _l_. But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what
connubial felicity really was. He resigned all claim to assistance
in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to
receive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds. Collins’s offer was now nearly at an end, and
Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily
attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusion of her mother. I am the
happiest creature in the world. Marianne severely censured herself for what she had said; but her own
forgiveness might have been more speedy, had she known how little
offence it had given her sister. She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in
silence; on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree; for
in Darcy’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her,
which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against
another. How is Miss Fairfax?—I hope she caught no cold
last night. Nobody could tell. Weston,
how could you think of such a thing?—Mr. Darcy!--and so it does, I vow. I am no
stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister’s infamous
elopement. For my part, I am determined never to speak
of it again to anybody. Before her removing from Norland, Elinor had painted a very pretty pair
of screens for her sister-in-law, which being now just mounted and
brought home, ornamented her present drawing room; and these screens,
catching the eye of John Dashwood on his following the other gentlemen
into the room, were officiously handed by him to Colonel Brandon for
his admiration. But I was
willing to show you that I had not forgot our old disputes.”

“I love to be reminded of the past, Edward—whether it be melancholy or
gay, I love to recall it—and you will never offend me by talking of
former times. He owns it
himself without disguise.”

“No,” said Darcy, “I have made no such pretension. You need
not be prompted to write with the appearance of sorrow for his
disappointment.”

“You think I ought to refuse him then,” said Harriet, looking down. and is not that the
commonest infirmity of declining life?”

“My dearest child,” said her mother, laughing, “at this rate you must
be in continual terror of _my_ decay; and it must seem to you a miracle
that my life has been extended to the advanced age of forty.”

“Mama, you are not doing me justice. And what
good does talking ever do you know?”

“In this affair it can only do harm; more so perhaps than in many cases
of a similar kind, for it has been attended by circumstances which, for
the sake of every one concerned in it, make it unfit to become the
public conversation. I am sure you always thought me unfit for the office I held.”

“Yes,” said he, smiling. She had yet another reason for wishing her children to remain where
they were; a letter from her son-in-law had told her that he and his
wife were to be in town before the middle of February, and she judged
it right that they should sometimes see their brother. Weston certainly would never marry again. When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to
Elizabeth,--

“Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Elinor joyfully treasured her words as she answered,

“If you could be assured of that, you think you should be easy.”

“Yes. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was
turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated
himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into
conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, and on the
probability of a rainy season, made her feel that the commonest,
dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the
skill of the speaker. She knew her
sister’s temper. But no
letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled. It was a great consolation that Mr. I shall certainly be at leisure.”

“Upon my word,” exclaimed Emma, “you amuse me! I did not think Mrs. Mr. We had had a great deal of trouble in
persuading him to sit at all. Dashwood would
have been secured by any act of attention to her child; but the
influence of youth, beauty, and elegance, gave an interest to the
action which came home to her feelings. and so did Mrs. Her breath, her skin, her lips, all
flattered Elinor with signs of amendment; and Marianne fixed her eyes
on her with a rational, though languid, gaze. Dear me! Darcy himself; but
whenever she did catch a glimpse she saw an expression of general
complaisance, and in all that he said, she heard an accent so far
removed from _hauteur_ or disdain of his companions, as convinced her
that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed,
however temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one
day. Bennet said only, “Nonsense,
nonsense!”

“What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?” cried he. From Frank Churchill’s face, where he
thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away, he had
involuntarily turned to hers; but she was indeed behind, and too busy
with her shawl. It is
of importance that no time should be lost with him, for he will of
course have much to do relative to his ordination.”

This speech at first puzzled Mrs. Willoughby
was out of the question. Their love of society, and their new dining-room, prepared
every body for their keeping dinner-company; and a few parties, chiefly
among the single men, had already taken place. The woman
was better off; she might have the assistance of fine clothes, and the
privilege of bashfulness, but the man had only his own good sense to
depend on; and when she considered how peculiarly unlucky poor Mr. She was out; and I felt it impossible not
to wait till she came in. It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence,
a most country-town indifference to decorum.”

“It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,” said
Bingley. What he means to do, I am sure I know not; but
his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any measure in the
best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton
again to-morrow evening. Dashwood was too much astonished to speak, and another
pause succeeded. He
sat really lost in thought for the first few minutes; and when rousing
himself, it was only to say,

“Of all horrid things, leave-taking is the worst.”

“But you will come again,” said Emma. But this does not acquit _him_, Mrs. I am always well, you know. Well, Colonel
Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? “I am sorry to find, my love, that my father does not think you looking
well—but I hope it is only from being a little fatigued. I avoided the Middletons as
much as possible, as well as everybody else who was likely to prove an
acquaintance in common. Every letter
from her is read forty times over; her compliments to all friends go
round and round again; and if she does but send her aunt the pattern of
a stomacher, or knit a pair of garters for her grandmother, one hears
of nothing else for a month. Weston—no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to her;
and it would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how to
teach, should not have their powers in exercise again. Darcy
had voluntarily done for Lydia. Her fancy was very active. “A man who has once been refused! There is jealousy. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. “’Tis an _etiquette_ I despise,” said he. She was awake the
whole night, and she wept the greatest part of it. CHAPTER XXVII. “Mr. Elton as one cannot but
value.”

“Yes,” said Mr. [Illustration: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER V. “I have no doubt of his being a most amiable young man. it was melancholy to leave her to such
society! Who would have thought she could be so thin and small!”

“She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind. Mr. Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley. Elizabeth now began to revive. and Mrs. It is not
Swisserland, but it will be something for a young man so much in want
of a change. Last night after tea, when you and mama went out of
the room, they were whispering and talking together as fast as could
be, and he seemed to be begging something of her, and presently he took
up her scissors and cut off a long lock of her hair, for it was all
tumbled down her back; and he kissed it, and folded it up in a piece of
white paper; and put it into his pocket-book.”

For such particulars, stated on such authority, Elinor could not
withhold her credit; nor was she disposed to it, for the circumstance
was in perfect unison with what she had heard and seen herself. Five hundred a year! She was on the point of continuing her
walk, when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove
which edged the park: he was moving that way; and fearful of its being
Mr. Mr. In that, he
could not be defended; but if he had injured her, how much more had he
injured himself; if her case were pitiable, his was hopeless. The coming of her
sister’s family was so very near at hand, that first in anticipation,
and then in reality, it became henceforth her prime object of interest;
and during the ten days of their stay at Hartfield it was not to be
expected—she did not herself expect—that any thing beyond occasional,
fortuitous assistance could be afforded by her to the lovers. When first
he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all
were. I was snowed up at a friend’s house once for a week. “One had rather,
on such occasions, do too much than too little. Bennet could not give her consent, or
speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings,
though she talked to Bingley of nothing else, for half an hour; and when
Mr. One could not
leave her out.”

Emma denied none of it aloud, and agreed to none of it in private. Mrs. Weston, always alert when business was to be done, and as incapable of
procrastinating any evil that was inevitable, as of foreseeing any that
was doubtful, said, “It was time to go;” and the young man, though he
might and did sigh, could not but agree, to take leave. Mr. Elton would hesitate
to assure you of there being a _very_ musical society in Highbury; and
I hope you will not find he has outstepped the truth more than may be
pardoned, in consideration of the motive.”

“No, indeed, I have no doubts at all on that head. madness, if it is
so; but I hope you are mistaken.”

“I saw her answer!—nothing could be clearer.”

“You saw her answer!—you wrote her answer too. His eldest daughter’s alarm was equal to his own. He saw the necessity of inviting the Miss
Steeles immediately, and his conscience was pacified by the resolution
of inviting his sisters another year; at the same time, however, slyly
suspecting that another year would make the invitation needless, by
bringing Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon’s wife, and Marianne as
_their_ visitor. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with
the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her
tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was
delighting both him and herself. Frank
Churchill, which always interested her. People do not die of little
trifling colds. This set the matter beyond a
doubt. Elinor was robbed of all presence
of mind by such an address, and was unable to say a word. Hurst’s gown----”

Here she was interrupted again. Let me do it without further loss of time. and Mrs. He could be no judge, however,
of the evil he was holding cheap. The man must be a
blockhead who wanted more. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he
received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. I had
an acrostic once sent to me upon my own name, which I was not at all
pleased with. Churchill had made a point of
it, as a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lost; and
every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum.”—Emma had
promised; but still Harriet must be excepted. And
when we _do_ return, it shall not be like other travellers, without
being able to give one accurate idea of anything. The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next
morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. He was fond of
the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal
enjoyments. And yet she was a happy woman, and
a woman whom no one named without good-will. You may remember
what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it.”

They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast
to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister’s sake, to provoke him,
she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile,--

“Come, Mr. When the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after dinner, this poverty
was particularly evident, for the gentlemen _had_ supplied the
discourse with some variety—the variety of politics, inclosing land,
and breaking horses—but then it was all over; and one subject only
engaged the ladies till coffee came in, which was the comparative
heights of Harry Dashwood, and Lady Middleton’s second son William, who
were nearly of the same age. “So calm! At his own ball he
offended two or three young ladies by not asking them to dance; and I
spoke to him twice myself without receiving an answer. They
ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the
library;--their father was in neither; and they were on the point of
seeking him upstairs with their mother, when they were met by the
butler, who said,--

“If you are looking for my master, ma’am, he is walking towards the
little copse.”

Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once more,
and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately
pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock. His
imprudence had made her miserable for a while; but it seemed to have
deprived himself of all chance of ever being otherwise. Harris arrived, he declared
his patient materially better. Woodhouse—“yes, certainly—I cannot deny
that Mrs. My being saved from pain is a very
secondary consideration. Willoughby’s pointer, than he could describe to her the shades of his
mind. Woodhouse, who commended her
very much for thinking of sending for Perry, and only regretted that
she had not done it. Weston last
night. Martin! Ferrars.”

“We can mean no other,” cried Lucy, smiling. The same manners, however, which recommended Mrs. Oh, he is the handsomest young man that
ever was seen!”

Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Ferrars is a
charming woman, and so is your sister. Neither of them were ever again to be mentioned to Mrs. They came from Exeter, well provided with
admiration for the use of Sir John Middleton, his family, and all his
relations, and no niggardly proportion was now dealt out to his fair
cousins, whom they declared to be the most beautiful, elegant,
accomplished, and agreeable girls they had ever beheld, and with whom
they were particularly anxious to be better acquainted. She read what made her wretched. Mr. She was
sure it was very ill—it cried, and fretted, and was all over pimples. while attending me in all my misery, has this been on your
heart? A week to-morrow!—And I have hardly begun to enjoy myself. Gardiner,
who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of
returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. But Colonel, where have you been to since we
parted? The parties stood thus:

The two mothers, though each really convinced that her own son was the
tallest, politely decided in favour of the other. Since her
being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud;
but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was
only exceedingly shy. For though your
accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my behaviour
to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to
check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence,
which your lady possesses.”

[Illustration:

     “No, no; stay where you are”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?”

“Oh yes. It is now
three years ago (she had just reached her fourteenth year,) that I
removed her from school, to place her under the care of a very
respectable woman, residing in Dorsetshire, who had the charge of four
or five other girls of about the same time of life; and for two years I
had every reason to be pleased with her situation. “When do you go back again?”

“I do not know.” And thus ended their discourse. Frank Churchill and me; and, therefore, it seems as if
such a thing even as this, may have occurred before—and if I should be
so fortunate, beyond expression, as to—if Mr. I have been acting
contrary to all my sense of right; and the fortunate turn that every
thing has taken, and the kindness I am now receiving, is what my
conscience tells me ought not to be.’ ‘Do not imagine, madam,’ she
continued, ‘that I was taught wrong. All these jealousies and discontents, however, were so totally
unsuspected by Mrs. It must have been only to one end. Has he been acting a
part in his behaviour to your sister all this time? “I was very often
influenced rightly by you—oftener than I would own at the time. Mr. It is a pity they are not handsome! Emma’s only
surprize was that Jane Fairfax should accept those attentions and
tolerate Mrs. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and
cast her eyes round the room in quest of some amusement; when, hearing
her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly
towards him and said,--

“By the bye Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at
Netherfield? “But so we all do. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XVIII. This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor, restored to those of
her sister all, and more than all, their former agitation. The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Philipses,
the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its
engagement. how unhappy I make you!”

“I only wish,” replied her sister, “there were any thing I _could_ do,
which might be of comfort to you.”

This, as every thing else would have been, was too much for Marianne,
who could only exclaim, in the anguish of her heart, “Oh! How very comfortable they make it;—impossible to feel cold
with such precautions. One cannot wonder, one cannot wonder. Elton at the same moment came congratulating me
upon it! Mrs. If not wise or refined herself,
she would have connected him with those who were; but Miss Hawkins, it
might be fairly supposed from her easy conceit, had been the best of
her own set. The communicative lady I learnt, on inquiry,
for I stayed in the shop till they were gone, was a Mrs. Weston”—with half a sigh and half a
smile at her. Dashwood, who could not think a man five years younger than
herself, so exceedingly ancient as he appeared to the youthful fancy of
her daughter, ventured to clear Mrs. It
had formerly been Charlotte’s, and over the mantelpiece still hung a
landscape in coloured silks of her performance, in proof of her having
spent seven years at a great school in town to some effect. [Illustration]

On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. I have no faith in Mrs. Her narration was clear and simple; and though it could not be given
without emotion, it was not accompanied by violent agitation, nor
impetuous grief. There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true
enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste. “She is a riddle, quite a riddle!” said she.—“To chuse to remain here
month after month, under privations of every sort! The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were married; and Elinor now
hoped, as there could be no danger of her seeing either of them, to
prevail on her sister, who had never yet left the house since the blow
first fell, to go out again by degrees as she had done before. Poor souls! Though Lydia’s short
letter to Mrs. ‘If you must
go, my dear,’ said I, ‘you must, and I will say you are laid down upon
the bed.’”

Emma was most sincerely interested. Has she run away because we are come? Well,
now I have just given you a hint of what Jane writes about, we will
turn to her letter, and I am sure she tells her own story a great deal
better than I can tell it for her.”

“I am afraid we must be running away,” said Emma, glancing at Harriet,
and beginning to rise—“My father will be expecting us. There is not a stone
laid of Fanny’s green-house, and nothing but the plan of the
flower-garden marked out.”

“Where is the green-house to be?”

“Upon the knoll behind the house. Mrs. All that remained to be wished was, that the
nephew should form the attachment, as, with all her goodwill in the
cause, Emma could feel no certainty of its being already formed. There could be no doubt of his great pleasure in seeing
her. He is come--Mr. She will be mistaken, however. Weston,
indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general; he became
liable to all these charges. “We think _now_,”—said Mr. my dear, how calmly
you talk of it; and can the Colonel wait two or three months! Dixon, which she
had not only so foolishly fashioned and harboured herself, but had so
unpardonably imparted; an idea which she greatly feared had been made a
subject of material distress to the delicacy of Jane’s feelings, by the
levity or carelessness of Frank Churchill’s. Hurst had a house. She was short and plump, had a very pretty
face, and the finest expression of good humour in it that could
possibly be. Bennet. If they must dance, they
had better dance at Randalls. It seems but the work
of a moment. I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.”

“Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all
this?”

“_I_ never saw such a woman. I should be surprized if, after seeing them, you could be in
company with Mr. Frank Churchill sang again. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a
doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. Cole, to add his very pressing entreaties; and as, in every respect, it
suited Emma best to lead, she gave a very proper compliance. No, no, they must get a stout girl of all
works. Smiles of intelligence passed between her and the gentleman on first
glancing towards Miss Fairfax; but it was most prudent to avoid speech. I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions,
though you make so noble a profession of doing it, but I honestly tell
you what they are.”

“And, upon my word, they have an air of great probability. But I must write no more. Marianne could speak _her_ happiness only by tears. Depend upon it
that whatever unemployed sum may remain, when I make up my accounts in
the spring, I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dispose of it
in a manner so painful to you. “It is
impossible that Emma should not miss such a companion,” said Mr. I said to my mother, ‘Upon my
word, ma’am—.’ Thank you, my mother is remarkably well. I felt that I admired you, but I told myself it was only
friendship; and till I began to make comparisons between yourself and
Lucy, I did not know how far I was got. Gardiner’s
long letter; but now, having _that_ to communicate which she knew would
be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt
had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as
follows:--

“I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done,
for your long, kind, satisfactory detail of particulars; but, to say the
truth, I was too cross to write. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and
shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well
aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds
in the 4 per cents., which will not be yours till after your mother’s
decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. Is nothing due to me on that
score? He might have doubled his presumption to me—but poor
Harriet!”

How she could have been so deceived!—He protested that he had never
thought seriously of Harriet—never! Mrs. The public pays and must be served
well.”

The varieties of handwriting were farther talked of, and the usual
observations made. Darcy. You do not mean it?”

“You may well be amazed,” returned Mrs. Wickham began the subject himself. Luckily Lady Middleton’s mother had arrived at Barton
within the last hour, and as she was a very cheerful agreeable woman,
he hoped the young ladies would not find it so very dull as they might
imagine. She
studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at
times widely different. Hodges may well be angry. Emma looked at
her, quite unable to speak. my dear mother, you must be wrong in permitting an engagement
between a daughter so young, a man so little known, to be carried on in
so doubtful, so mysterious a manner! I
mention no names; but happy the man who changes Emma for Harriet!”




CHAPTER XIV


Mrs. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep
his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
neighbour in her.”

Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced: their behaviour at
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and
with a judgment, too, unassailed by any attention to herself, she was
very little disposed to approve them. “On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a
confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. Her heart was devoted to
Willoughby, and the fond attachment to Norland, which she brought with
her from Sussex, was more likely to be softened than she had thought it
possible before, by the charms which his society bestowed on her
present home. Knightley’s attention, and every
syllable of their conversation was as distinctly heard by the others,
as if it had passed within the same apartment. And Marianne was in spirits; happy
in the mildness of the weather, and still happier in her expectation of
a frost. Bates—we passed her house—I
saw Miss Bates at the window. Mrs. She saw, with the creative eye
of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers. Churchill’s illness.”

“If she is really ill, why not go to Bath, Mr. Elton, and this is
the only way I have of doing him a service.”

“Mr. But now she made the sudden
resolution of not passing their door without going in—observing, as she
proposed it to Harriet, that, as well as she could calculate, they were
just now quite safe from any letter from Jane Fairfax. Darcy’s using
him ill, it is perfectly false: for, on the contrary, he has been always
remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated Mr. I knew you would be wishing me joy.”

“Nay, if you are so serious about it, I shall consider the matter as
absolutely settled. I am sure I never suspected
it, you did it so naturally.”

“And so you actually put this piece of court-plaister by for his sake!”
said Emma, recovering from her state of shame and feeling divided
between wonder and amusement. You and I, Emma, will venture to take the part of
the poor husband. Darcy. After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once
more continued to read. And, my dear, whenever he comes,
you had better let him look at little Bella’s throat.”

“Oh! Concern for her
unhappiness, and respect for her fortitude under it, must strengthen
every attachment. They seemed to be within half a sentence of
Harriet, and her immediate feeling was to avert the subject, if
possible. About a week after their arrival, it became certain that Willoughby was
also arrived. Palmer herself, ever spoke of him before her. Elton’s conduct; it had been unpardonable rudeness;
and Mrs. I saw you first in February.” And then
whispering—“Our companions are excessively stupid. I remember her aunt very well, Biddy
Henshawe; she married a very wealthy man. Every thing that the most zealous
affection, the most solicitous care could do to render her comfortable,
was the office of each watchful companion, and each found their reward
in her bodily ease, and her calmness of spirits. It was
an awkward ceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visits, and a
man had need be all grace to acquit himself well through it. When breakfast was over she walked out by herself, and wandered about
the village of Allenham, indulging the recollection of past enjoyment
and crying over the present reverse for the chief of the morning. “Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about Mr. The dinner was a grand one, the servants were numerous, and every thing
bespoke the Mistress’s inclination for show, and the Master’s ability
to support it. What do I not
owe you! papa—that is what you never have been able to accomplish, and I do
not think you ever will. Collins,
and Mr. These are conditions which,
     considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as
     far as I thought myself privileged, for you. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left
to the guardianship of my mother’s nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and
myself. The idea of Mr. “He trifles here,” said he, “as to the temptation. Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrusive attention in her power; and
she would have tried to sooth and tranquilize her still more, had not
Marianne entreated her, with all the eagerness of the most nervous
irritability, not to speak to her for the world. Dashwood. He and I
have been at times thrown a good deal together, while you have been
wholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother. It would only be giving trouble and distress. He came to speak to his father on a
subject,—to announce an attachment—”

She stopped to breathe. only think! But when they had withdrawn, he said to her, “Mrs. Weston. Cole,
that every thing was rapidly clearing away, to give proper space. [Illustration]

As no objection was made to the young people’s engagement with their
aunt, and all Mr. This, you know, speaks a great degree of
weakness—but now she is so impatient to be in town, that she means to
sleep only two nights on the road.—So Frank writes word. He danced only four
dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more
than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner. Her wish of shewing you attention could not
be doubted, and his being a disengaged and social man makes it all
easy. I should be extremely sorry to be giving them any
pain. Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed? I made the best excuses I could for not
having been able to wait on him and Mrs. As it was impossible, however, now to prevent
their coming, Lady Middleton resigned herself to the idea of it, with
all the philosophy of a well-bred woman, contenting herself with merely
giving her husband a gentle reprimand on the subject five or six times
every day. At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and
the others returned into the house. From the entrance hall, of which Mr. She was obliged, in
spite of her previous determination to the contrary, to do it all the
justice that Mrs. such a deceitful dog! But still he would
be her husband. “My dear Miss Woodhouse,” said the latter, “I am just run across to
entreat the favour of you to come and sit down with us a little while,
and give us your opinion of our new instrument; you and Miss Smith. Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since
those two decisive dances.—Emma knew that he had, on that occasion,
found her much superior to his expectation. I am thwarted in
every thing material. I can see nothing at all extraordinary
in him now.—I do not care whether I meet him or not—except that of the
two I had rather not see him—and indeed I would go any distance round
to avoid him—but I do not envy his wife in the least; I neither admire
her nor envy her, as I have done: she is very charming, I dare say, and
all that, but I think her very ill-tempered and disagreeable—I shall
never forget her look the other night!—However, I assure you, Miss
Woodhouse, I wish her no evil.—No, let them be ever so happy together,
it will not give me another moment’s pang: and to convince you that I
have been speaking truth, I am now going to destroy—what I ought to
have destroyed long ago—what I ought never to have kept—I know that
very well (blushing as she spoke).—However, now I will destroy it
all—and it is my particular wish to do it in your presence, that you
may see how rational I am grown. I dare say my daughter will be here presently,
Miss Woodhouse. Their brother is a pleasant, gentlemanlike
man--he is a great friend of Darcy’s.”

“Oh yes,” said Elizabeth drily--“Mr. Jennings could talk on no other subject, Elinor soon saw the
necessity of preparing Marianne for its discussion. Dashwood indulged
herself in the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-law and his wife
that she was provided with a house, and should incommode them no longer
than till every thing were ready for her inhabiting it. If you only hope to have your
assertion contradicted, as I must suppose to be the case, you ought to
recollect that I am the last person in the world to do it. Weston to have
felt what you would feel in giving up Henry or John. Smallridge is in a great hurry. It was the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons were at
Hartfield, which made their presence so acceptable; for though her
first remark, on reading it, was that “of course it must be declined,”
she so very soon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to do,
that their advice for her going was most prompt and successful. Good Mrs. Fetch Miss
Bates. Elton’s having dropt a hint. By the bye, _that_ is almost enough to put one out of conceit
with a niece. “She is my youngest girl but one. That sentence is very prettily turned. The last born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth
as the first. so cheerful! But Sir John did not sport long with
the curiosity which he delighted to raise, for he had at least as much
pleasure in telling the name, as Miss Steele had in hearing it. I want you to save yourself from greater pain. When is it to take place?”

“Mr. You
have perhaps been misinformed, or purposely deceived, in something
concerning me, which may have lowered me in your opinion. She and Mr. Marianne’s countenance was more
communicative. Miss Bates said a great
deal; Mrs. Mr. Soon after
     you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what
     part of London they were. It chiefly consisted of household linen,
plate, china, and books, with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne’s. that he should have been in love with her for so many months! “On
this point we have been wretched. Dear Harriet, I give myself joy of this. Lydia came to
     us, and Wickham had constant admission to the house. She sometimes endeavoured for a few
minutes to read; but the book was soon thrown aside, and she returned
to the more interesting employment of walking backwards and forwards
across the room, pausing for a moment whenever she came to the window,
in hopes of distinguishing the long-expected rap. Elton, and she was so
completely surprized that she could not avoid a little start, and a
little blush, at the sound. Weston’s surprize, and felt that it must be great, at an
address which, in words and manner, was assuming to himself the right
of first interest in her; and as for herself, she was too much provoked
and offended to have the power of directly saying any thing to the
purpose. But I must object to your dooming Colonel Brandon and his wife to the
constant confinement of a sick chamber, merely because he chanced to
complain yesterday (a very cold damp day) of a slight rheumatic feel in
one of his shoulders.”

“But he talked of flannel waistcoats,” said Marianne; “and with me a
flannel waistcoat is invariably connected with aches, cramps,
rheumatisms, and every species of ailment that can afflict the old and
the feeble.”

“Had he been only in a violent fever, you would not have despised him
half so much. As to his real character, had information been in her power,
she had never felt a wish of inquiring. It is not
of peculiar, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. It had
no advantage of situation; but had been very much smartened up by the
present proprietor; and, such as it was, there could be no possibility
of the two friends passing it without a slackened pace and observing
eyes.—Emma’s remark was—

“There it is. Knightley’s air is so remarkably good that it is not fair to
compare Mr. John Knightley’s being a
lawyer is very inconvenient.—Poor Isabella!—she is sadly taken away
from us all!—and how sorry she will be when she comes, not to see Miss
Taylor here!”

“She will not be surprized, papa, at least.”

“I do not know, my dear. “I never heard anything so
abominable. But
if he marries a very ignorant, vulgar woman, certainly I had better not
visit her, if I can help it.”

Emma watched her through the fluctuations of this speech, and saw no
alarming symptoms of love. I need not explain myself farther; and
     though _we_ know this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she
     feels it, it will easily account for her behaviour to me; and so
     deservedly dear as he is to his sister, whatever anxiety she may
     feel on his behalf is natural and amiable. She had great
satisfaction in replying that she was going into Devonshire.—Edward
turned hastily towards her, on hearing this, and, in a voice of
surprise and concern, which required no explanation to her, repeated,
“Devonshire! Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth
again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to
make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Wickham himself.”

“No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.”

“This account then is what he has received from Mr. “We
can all plague and punish one another. They must not over-salt the leg; and then, if it
is not over-salted, and if it is very thoroughly boiled, just as Serle
boils ours, and eaten very moderately of, with a boiled turnip, and a
little carrot or parsnip, I do not consider it unwholesome.”

“Emma,” said Mr. Such a charming man! Reynolds informed them, that it had been taken in his
father’s lifetime. In a week or two, I suppose, we
shall be going; and, I trust, Edward will not be very unwilling to
accept the charge.”

Poor Edward muttered something, but what it was, nobody knew, not even
himself. They walked along the road through the valley, and chiefly in silence,
for Marianne’s _mind_ could not be controlled, and Elinor, satisfied
with gaining one point, would not then attempt more. Elton, by
calling you Mr. Your uncle! Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_
surprised you. “But Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax!” said Mr. And how tired you must be after your journey! Churchill’s
importance in the world, and Jane Fairfax’s, struck her; one was every
thing, the other nothing—and she sat musing on the difference of
woman’s destiny, and quite unconscious on what her eyes were fixed,
till roused by Miss Bates’s saying,

“Aye, I see what you are thinking of, the pianoforte. This
is feeling your way. Mrs. I will not torment myself
any longer by remaining among friends whose society it is impossible
for me now to enjoy.”

He then hastily took leave of them all and left the room. “Such a home, indeed! We
dressed up Chamberlayne in woman’s clothes, on purpose to pass for a
lady,--only think what fun! I do not believe she often sees such at home.”

“The person of whom I speak is a gentleman and a stranger.”

Mrs. Bingley before, expressed to her sister how very much
she admired him. “This is coming as you should do,” said she; “like a gentleman.—I am
quite glad to see you.”

He thanked her, observing, “How lucky that we should arrive at the same
moment! Nobody talked about it. Dashwood, persuaded that such
an excursion would be productive of much amusement to both her
daughters, and perceiving through all her affectionate attention to
herself, how much the heart of Marianne was in it, would not hear of
their declining the offer upon _her_ account; insisted on their both
accepting it directly; and then began to foresee, with her usual
cheerfulness, a variety of advantages that would accrue to them all,
from this separation. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure you
I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep your
engagement.”

Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of
his concern at having been prevented by business. Jennings’s intimate
acquaintance, whom she had met and invited in the morning, dined with
them. _Now_, he
said, he was beginning to have no longer the same wish. Well, much good may it do them! Elton met her with unusual graciousness, she hoped
the rencontre would do them no harm. He
took the opposite chair, and for half a minute not a word was said by
either. He was
looked on as sufficiently belonging to the place to make his merits and
prospects a kind of common concern. “Wait for his having a living!—ay, we all know how _that_ will
end:—they will wait a twelvemonth, and finding no good comes of it,
will set down upon a curacy of fifty pounds a-year, with the interest
of his two thousand pounds, and what little matter Mr. Mrs. yes; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comes to
Highbury. What an ill-natured woman his mother is,
an’t she? She was not rendered formidable by
silence: but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone as
marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. “I am so glad to meet you;” said Miss Steele, taking her familiarly by
the arm—“for I wanted to see you of all things in the world.” And then
lowering her voice, “I suppose Mrs. Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn;
coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after
supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough
detested, had given him an invitation to dinner, which he thought
himself obliged to accept. Mrs. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing
at the sight of each other. Bingley met them with hopes
that Mrs. Weston, instantly. Knightley cannot stop. Ferrars,” added he, lowering his voice to the tone becoming so
important a subject, “knows nothing about it at present, and I believe
it will be best to keep it entirely concealed from her as long as may
be. Collins was to attend them,
at the request of Mr. It was a valued, a precious trust to me; and gladly would I have
discharged it in the strictest sense, by watching over her education
myself, had the nature of our situations allowed it; but I had no
family, no home; and my little Eliza was therefore placed at school. Still,
however, affection was glad to catch at any reasonable excuse for not
hurrying on the wretched moment. They each felt his sorrows, and
their own obligations, and Marianne, by general consent, was to be the
reward of all. But she had seen enough of him to join in all the
admiration of the others, and with an energy which always adorned her
praise. Weston was musing. Mrs. His pleasure in music, though it amounted not to that
ecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with her own, was
estimable when contrasted against the horrible insensibility of the
others; and she was reasonable enough to allow that a man of five and
thirty might well have outlived all acuteness of feeling and every
exquisite power of enjoyment. Woodhouse hoped to influence
every visitor of the newly married pair; but still the cake was eaten;
and there was no rest for his benevolent nerves till it was all gone. He had
been to several families that morning in hopes of procuring some
addition to their number, but it was moonlight and every body was full
of engagements. That his two sisters and Mr. The
event has proved, that I was a cunning fool, providing with great
circumspection for a possible opportunity of making myself contemptible
and wretched for ever. Collins
received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result
of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the
refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow
from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character. The compliments of his neighbours were over; he was no longer teased by
being wished joy of so sorrowful an event; and the wedding-cake, which
had been a great distress to him, was all eat up. _He_, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted with all the firmness of
a collected mind, made every necessary arrangement with the utmost
despatch, and calculated with exactness the time in which she might
look for his return. Darcy?”

“They are generally long; but whether always charming, it is not for me
to determine.”

“It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with
ease cannot write ill.”

“That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,” cried her
brother, “because he does _not_ write with ease. Yes, yes. She had a great idea that
people who had extensive grounds themselves cared very little for the
extensive grounds of any body else; but it was not worth while to
attack an error so double-dyed, and therefore only said in reply,

“When you have seen more of this country, I am afraid you will think
you have overrated Hartfield. Collins for
a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relations
were very intimately acquainted with the family of De Bourgh. Perry tells me that Mr. But his coming for me as he did, with such active, such
ready friendship, is enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men.”

“His character, however,” answered Elinor, “does not rest on _one_ act
of kindness, to which his affection for Marianne, were humanity out of
the case, would have prompted him. The remaining five were left to their own powers,
and Emma doubted their getting on very well; for Mr. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken
     pride, and confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to
     lay his private actions open to the world. Long. Churchill’s decease, Emma was
called downstairs to Mr. “I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied with my
reception. Jennings, who scrupled not to attribute the
severity and danger of this attack to the many weeks of previous
indisposition which Marianne’s disappointment had brought on. Hurst
also made her a slight bow, and said he was “very glad;” but diffuseness
and warmth remained for Bingley’s salutation. After a slight preparation for good news,
the letter was read aloud. ‘Miss Woodhouse calls me the
child of good fortune.’—Those were Miss Woodhouse’s words, were they?—
And a fine ending—and there is the letter. Woodhouse, who could not
be induced to get so far as London, even for poor Isabella’s sake; and
who consequently was now most nervously and apprehensively happy in
forestalling this too short visit. To you, he will talk of farming; to me, of drawing or music;
and so on to every body, having that general information on all
subjects which will enable him to follow the lead, or take the lead,
just as propriety may require, and to speak extremely well on each;
that is my idea of him.”

“And mine,” said Mr. Jenkinson was
arranging Miss De Bourgh’s footstool,--that she said, ‘Mr. I hope we shall have many sweet little
concerts together. Martin with _him_. We may compare our different opinions.”

“No--I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of
something else.”

“The _present_ always occupies you in such scenes--does it?” said he,
with a look of doubt. The vulgar freedom and
folly of the eldest left her no recommendation, and as Elinor was not
blinded by the beauty, or the shrewd look of the youngest, to her want
of real elegance and artlessness, she left the house without any wish
of knowing them better. I have been too much at my ease, too
happy, too frank. I shall have no fears for you with him. “No, my mother is
in town.”

“I meant,” said Elinor, taking up some work from the table, “to enquire
for Mrs. His
marriage was now fast approaching; and she was at length so far resigned
as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured
tone, that she “_wished_ they might be happy.” Thursday was to be the
wedding-day, and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and
when she rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother’s
ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself,
accompanied her out of the room. Weston
is really as kind as herself. she was not so easily to be talked out
of it. Let her name her own supper,
and go to bed. Weston gave her the history of the engagements at Enscombe, which
allowed his son to answer for having an entire fortnight at his
command, as well as the route and the method of his journey; and she
listened, and smiled, and congratulated. “I hope he has had no bad news,” said Lady Middleton. It is nearly fifty miles.”

“And what is fifty miles of good road? “My aunt,” she continued, “is going to-morrow into that part of the
town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street.”

She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley. Mr. You will all be
going soon I suppose; the whole party breaking up. Jennings, on returning from her ordinary visit to
Mrs. I never saw such a
likeness in my life. Let me advise you, then,
     my dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off
     your unworthy child from your affection for ever, and leave her to
     reap the fruits of her own heinous offence. Wingfield’s, which we have been applying at times ever since August.”

“It is not very likely, my dear, that bathing should have been of use
to her—and if I had known you were wanting an embrocation, I would have
spoken to—

“You seem to me to have forgotten Mrs. His
attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and
hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer
the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything. Ours are all apple-tarts. Into _one_ house in this
neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. Your conduct would be quite as
dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were
mounting your horse, a friend were to say, ‘Bingley, you had better stay
till next week,’ you would probably do it--you would probably not
go--and, at another word, might stay a month.”

“You have only proved by this,” cried Elizabeth, “that Mr. She wanted to ascertain the
feelings of each of her visitors, she wanted to compose her own, and to
make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she
feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom
she endeavoured to give pleasure were pre-possessed in her favour. “Oh, don’t be so sly before us,” said Mrs. If I had ever
learnt, I should have been a great proficient. She wanted
to be of use to her; wanted to shew a value for her society, and
testify respect and consideration. Jennings’s side, and in laughter without cause on
Mrs. But
if, which I rather imagine, your making the match, as you call it,
means only your planning it, your saying to yourself one idle day, ‘I
think it would be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr. Weston, “as I took Miss Taylor away, it is
incumbent on me to supply her place, if I can; and I will step to Mrs. Busy as he was, however, the young man was yet able to shew a most
happy countenance on seeing Emma again. Miss Marianne
must not expect to have all the men to herself. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing
her, she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with
composure. really, never!—Bless me! Elinor, persuaded that he had some communication to make in which her
sister was concerned, impatiently expected its opening. John Knightley is an affectionate
father. If you need farther
explanation, I have the honour, my dear madam, of being your husband’s
son, and the advantage of inheriting a disposition to hope for good,
which no inheritance of houses or lands can ever equal the value
of.—See me, then, under these circumstances, arriving on my first visit
to Randalls;—and here I am conscious of wrong, for that visit might
have been sooner paid. “You had better go on,” said she. Darcy. At the same time, I will not positively answer for my having
never dropt a hint, because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing
before I am aware. Weston,
did you ever hear the like? Palmer’s information respecting Willoughby was not very material;
but any testimony in his favour, however small, was pleasing to her. Weston and Mr. Jennings’s entrance, escaped with the
precious card. She fell into violent hysterics immediately, with such screams as
reached your brother’s ears, as he was sitting in his own dressing-room
down stairs, thinking about writing a letter to his steward in the
country. It was no time for hesitation. Colonel Campbell, you know, is quite our angel. Mrs. We want none of them;
do we?”

Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. Jennings
talked of Edward’s affection, it cost her only a spasm in her
throat.—Such advances towards heroism in her sister, made Elinor feel
equal to any thing herself. Her
sleep, though not so quiet as Elinor wished to see it, lasted a
considerable time; and anxious to observe the result of it herself, she
resolved to sit with her during the whole of it. From these instructions they were summoned by the
arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr. [Illustration]

Elizabeth’s spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr. But, now that she has written her letters, she says she shall soon be
well. Palmer, entered the drawing-room, where Elinor was sitting by
herself, with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared her to
hear something wonderful; and giving her time only to form that idea,
began directly to justify it, by saying,

“Lord! Knightley was a sort of general friend and adviser, and she knew
Mr. Mrs. She anticipated what would be felt in
the family when her situation became known: she was aware that no one
liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a
_dislike_ which not all his fortune and consequence might do away. “You forget that I have made no
answer. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. Forgive
me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make _me_ your
confidante.”




[Illustration:

     “Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak to you.”
]




CHAPTER LV. The kindness, the unceasing
kindness of Mrs. I was quite a proverb for it at
Maple Grove. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth
remained with no very cordial feelings towards him. She is
not the superior young woman which Emma’s friend ought to be. Darcy, he concluded
his speech, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the
room. Elton is going to be
married.”

Emma had not had time even to think of Mr. And there was my aunt, all the time I was
dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a
sermon. Cole had just been there, just called
in for ten minutes, and had been so good as to sit an hour with them,
and _she_ had taken a piece of cake and been so kind as to say she
liked it very much; and, therefore, she hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss
Smith would do them the favour to eat a piece too.”

The mention of the Coles was sure to be followed by that of Mr. Knightley keeping no horses,
having little spare money and a great deal of health, activity, and
independence, was too apt, in Emma’s opinion, to get about as he could,
and not use his carriage so often as became the owner of Donwell Abbey. But I am not afraid of your seeing what he writes.”

“He writes like a sensible man,” replied Emma, when she had read the
letter. She declared her resolution. You order me, whether you speak or not. John loves Emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind
affection, and Isabella always thinks as he does; except when he is not
quite frightened enough about the children. He caught her.”

“He did. Marianne, though without knowing
it herself, reaped all its advantage; for neither Mrs. Elton’s return, and being hung over the mantelpiece of the common
sitting-room, he got up to look at it, and sighed out his half
sentences of admiration just as he ought; and as for Harriet’s
feelings, they were visibly forming themselves into as strong and
steady an attachment as her youth and sort of mind admitted. The danger, however, was at present so
unperceived, that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes with
her. He had just
read Elton’s letter as I was shewn in, and handed it to me directly.”

“Well! They arrived.—Mrs. Mrs. I have now
a key to all her odd looks and ways. A clergyman like you must marry. I hoped I was perfectly equal
to any sacrifice of that description. Willing therefore to delay the evil hour, she resolved to
wait till her sister’s health were more secure, before she appointed
it. Bennet was satisfied, and
soon afterwards ordered her carriage. “No, not true on your side. Does he
know his real character?”

“I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly
did. Ferrars, is perhaps, altogether a little extraordinary. As
to connexion, there Emma was perfectly easy; persuaded, that after all
his own vaunted claims and disdain of Harriet, he had done nothing. I wonder that the very
pride of this Mr. Twice was his card found on
the table, when they returned from their morning’s engagements. “For the present, the whole
affair was to be completely a secret. There are not
many men who would act as he has done. Now was not it so? and it was but yesterday I was telling Mr. Mama says _he_ was in love with your sister
too. here it is. Mrs. Of what he
has _particularly_ accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what I
shall relate I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity. Weston,” said Mr. Considering the very superior claims of the object, it ought; and
judging by its apparently stronger effect on Harriet’s mind, producing
reserve and self-command, it would.—She must communicate the painful
truth, however, and as soon as possible. I am
afraid it is just the same with him now; for he writes in wretched
spirits. A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have
now made it eligible. He
never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking
or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third
encounter that he was asking some odd unconnected questions--about her
pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her
opinion of Mr. “You have insulted me, in every possible method. After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health,
good-humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn. The Middletons and Palmers—how am I to bear their pity? If the
errand were not a pleasure to me, it could be done, as it always is
when I am not here, by my grandmama’s.”

“Oh! You make the best of it—but
after you have been a week at Hartfield, you are all of you different
creatures; you do not look like the same. It will be so ridiculous to
see all his letters directed to him with an M.P.—But do you know, he
says, he will never frank for me? John Dashwood did not at all approve of what her husband intended
to do for his sisters. How could
she have exposed herself to such ill opinion in any one she valued! I have heard so much in praise of Mr. It checked the
idleness of one, and the business of the other. One consolation however remained for them, to which the exigence
of the moment gave more than usual propriety,—it was that of running
with all possible speed down the steep side of the hill which led
immediately to their garden gate. Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one parent than the other,
thought the boys were both remarkably tall for their age, and could not
conceive that there could be the smallest difference in the world
between them; and Miss Steele, with yet greater address gave it, as
fast as she could, in favour of each. “Shyness is only the effect of a sense of inferiority in some way or
other. Mr. Collins; which, as Jane
had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence,
she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his
letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. Bingley, his
two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man. It is only that he has better means of having it than
many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. And, in
short, from knowing his usual ways, I am very much inclined to think
that it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all. “You have something to tell me of Mr. Upon such occasions poor Mr. _That_ I will
never consent to. But the fact is, that
being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured
father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy
myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that
the loss to them might be as little as possible when the melancholy
event takes place--which, however, as I have already said, may not be
for several years. She had
brought evil on Harriet, on herself, and she too much feared, on Mr. [Illustration:

     “How nicely we are crammed in”
]




CHAPTER XXXIX. He was silent. Now, upon his father’s marriage, it was very generally proposed, as a
most proper attention, that the visit should take place. When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham’s
character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had
seldom been depressed before were now so much affected as to make it
almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful. Not that I had any doubt before—I
have so often heard Mr. Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours. Such behaviour as this, so exactly the reverse of her own, appeared no
more meritorious to Marianne, than her own had seemed faulty to her. “Shall you be in town this winter, Miss Dashwood?” said she with all
her accustomary complacency. This is brilliant indeed!—This is
admirable!—Excellently contrived, upon my word. The reason of this
sudden removal was soon evident. Dashwood as she
entered—“is she ill?”

“I hope not,” he replied, trying to look cheerful; and with a forced
smile presently added, “It is I who may rather expect to be ill—for I
am now suffering under a very heavy disappointment!”

“Disappointment?”

“Yes, for I am unable to keep my engagement with you. as I
talked of t’ other day. His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive: he had
either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying
his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most
incautiously shown. She has known him only a fortnight. She
was not so materially cast down, however, but that a little time and
the return of Harriet were very adequate restoratives. With the size and furniture of the house Mrs. Smith suspects his regard for Marianne, disapproves
of it, (perhaps because she has other views for him,) and on that
account is eager to get him away;—and that the business which she sends
him off to transact is invented as an excuse to dismiss him. Though Lydia had never
been a favourite with them, Mr. Edward was the first to
speak, and it was to notice Marianne’s altered looks, and express his
fear of her not finding London agree with her. I could
not have believed it! Miss
Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not well
enough to leave her room. Bennet’s eyes sparkled. Ever since I have known it I have been most anxious to
acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. One moment she feared that no serious design had
ever been formed on his side; and the next that some unfortunate
quarrel had taken place between him and her sister;—the distress in
which Marianne had quitted the room was such as a serious quarrel could
most reasonably account for, though when she considered what Marianne’s
love for him was, a quarrel seemed almost impossible. During all this time he was evidently
struggling for composure. I was convinced there were two, and there
is but one. I am grown neither humble nor
penitent by what has passed. They were all in high spirits and good
humour, eager to be happy, and determined to submit to the greatest
inconveniences and hardships rather than be otherwise. Lord! It is so much beyond any thing I deserve. But, to be sure, the
good lady who showed us the house did give him a most flaming character! His heart was now open to Elinor, all its weaknesses, all its errors
confessed, and his first boyish attachment to Lucy treated with all the
philosophic dignity of twenty-four. His own father did not long survive mine; and
within half a year from these events Mr. William Larkins is such an old
acquaintance! And as for Mrs. I wish you would try to
understand what an amiable young man may be likely to feel in directly
opposing those, whom as child and boy he has been looking up to all his
life.”

“Our amiable young man is a very weak young man, if this be the first
occasion of his carrying through a resolution to do right against the
will of others. And yet some of the plate would have been a very pleasant
addition to our own stock here.”

“Yes; and the set of breakfast china is twice as handsome as what
belongs to this house. Weston. Miss Dashwood, do you think people make love
when any body else is by? Collins; and as they walked down the garden, he was commissioning
her with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks
for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his
compliments to Mr. Against the interest of her own individual comfort, Mrs. For the last week they had seen very little
of either Lady Catherine or her daughter. To quit the neighbourhood of Norland was no longer an
evil; it was an object of desire; it was a blessing, in comparison of
the misery of continuing her daughter-in-law’s guest; and to remove for
ever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit or
visit it while such a woman was its mistress. She would not be so weak as
to throw away the comfort of a child, and yet retain the anxiety of a
parent!”

“Ah! Nobody else would come so early.’ ‘Well,’ said
she, ‘it must be borne some time or other, and it may as well be now.’
But then Patty came in, and said it was you. Weston was
the object of a regard which had its basis in gratitude and esteem. Do not imagine me in danger of
forgetting it.”

Harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few words of eager
exclamation. Weston do really prevent our
missing her by any means to the extent we ourselves anticipated—which
is the exact truth.”

“Just as it should be,” said Mr. What is your own opinion?”

“That it ought not to be attempted. She knew the importance of it,
and said every thing in her power to do it away. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and
not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise;
and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings
to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many
hours. John Knightley was a tall, gentleman-like, and very clever man;
rising in his profession, domestic, and respectable in his private
character; but with reserved manners which prevented his being
generally pleasing; and capable of being sometimes out of humour. When they sat down to supper, therefore,
she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within
one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was
talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing
else but of her expectation that Jane would be soon married to Mr. Soft is the very word for her eye—of all epithets, the
justest that could be given. A butcher hard by in the
village, and the parsonage-house within a stone’s throw. She sat in
silence almost all the way, wrapt in her own meditations, and scarcely
ever voluntarily speaking, except when any object of picturesque beauty
within their view drew from her an exclamation of delight exclusively
addressed to her sister. It
was not in their direct road; nor more than a mile or two out of it. But these, I suppose, are precisely what
you are without.”

“Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. Knightley, and, I am afraid, gave you
pain.—But if you have any wish to speak openly to me as a friend, or to
ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation—as a
friend, indeed, you may command me.—I will hear whatever you like. As Mrs. By Elizabeth’s instructions she began to comprehend that a
woman may take liberties with her husband, which a brother will not
always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself. It was several days before Willoughby’s name was mentioned before
Marianne by any of her family; Sir John and Mrs. “My love you contradict every body,” said his wife with her usual
laugh. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what
she did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely
the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw
her no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at
the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Not that
I care about it, though. I do not know of any
other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone,
and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding
out even so much as this.”




[Illustration:

     The Post
]




CHAPTER XLVIII. Bingley, _I_ always keep servants that can do their own
work; _my_ daughters are brought up differently. It is a corner room, and has windows on two sides. On the following Monday, Mrs. and Mrs. The
grounds of Hartfield were small, but neat and pretty; and the house was
modern and well-built. It was not unlikely, she thought, that she
might see Mr. Elton and I
are very good friends, and nothing more;” and she walked on, amusing
herself in the consideration of the blunders which often arise from a
partial knowledge of circumstances, of the mistakes which people of
high pretensions to judgment are for ever falling into; and not very
well pleased with her brother for imagining her blind and ignorant, and
in want of counsel. This weather will keep many sportsmen in the country.”

It was a lucky recollection, all her good spirits were restored by it. Mrs. And I am so glad your
sister is going to be well married! ‘You and I must part. If you could be
supposed to be biased in any respect by your own feelings, your opinion
would not be worth having.”

Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this, lest they might
provoke each other to an unsuitable increase of ease and unreserve; and
was even partly determined never to mention the subject again. Dining once with the Coles—and having a ball talked of,
which never took place. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not
like at all; and in her air altogether, there is a self-sufficiency
without fashion, which is intolerable.”

Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not
the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always
wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the
success she expected. When she
     did come, it was very evident that she had no pleasure in it; she
     made a slight, formal apology for not calling before, said not a
     word of wishing to see me again, and was, in every respect, so
     altered a creature, that when she went away I was perfectly
     resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his
being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs. Dashwood, “even if I remain at Barton; and in all probability,—for I
hear it is a large village,—indeed there certainly _must_ be some small
house or cottage close by, that would suit us quite as well as our
present situation.”

Poor Elinor!—here was a new scheme for getting her to Delaford!—but her
spirit was stubborn. I dare say, Miss Fairfax, that he either gave his
friend very minute directions, or wrote to Broadwood himself. Mrs. I am sorry I did not know it
before; for I certainly would not have suffered you to give me
particulars of a conversation which you ought not to have known
yourself. But, as it is, the disappointment is single, and, I
trust, will not be lasting. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother, an
hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her
impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he
did not come back she should think herself very ill-used. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in
his power to satisfy us on this head. I always fetch the letters
when I am here. certainly not too tall; not in the least too tall. Maple
Grove will probably be my model more than it ought to be—for we do not
at all affect to equal my brother, Mr. Nor did that day wear out her
resentment. I quite forgot! You and I need not be afraid. Gardiner himself
did not expect any success from this measure; but as his brother was
eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. His person and air were equal to what her fancy had ever drawn
for the hero of a favourite story; and in his carrying her into the
house with so little previous formality, there was a rapidity of
thought which particularly recommended the action to her. Let them
be sent to Donwell. “Miss Fairfax was not well enough
to write;” and when Mr. “Harriet!” cried Emma, after a moment’s pause—“What do you mean?—Good
Heaven! Much as she had suffered from her first conversation with Lucy on the
subject, she soon felt an earnest wish of renewing it; and this for
more reasons than one. John Knightley was a pretty, elegant little woman, of gentle,
quiet manners, and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate;
wrapt up in her family; a devoted wife, a doating mother, and so
tenderly attached to her father and sister that, but for these higher
ties, a warmer love might have seemed impossible. Knightley to be
no longer coming there for his evening comfort!—No longer walking in at
all hours, as if ever willing to change his own home for their’s!—How
was it to be endured? Lady Middleton was more agreeable
than her mother only in being more silent. Life could do nothing for her, beyond giving time for
a better preparation for death; and that was given. She had not thought her old friend
could have made so indifferent a suitor. The situation of Barton, in a county
so far distant from Sussex as Devonshire, which, but a few hours
before, would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh every
possible advantage belonging to the place, was now its first
recommendation. no, no”—cried Emma, laughing as carelessly as she could—“Upon no
account in the world. She played
over every favourite song that she had been used to play to Willoughby,
every air in which their voices had been oftenest joined, and sat at
the instrument gazing on every line of music that he had written out
for her, till her heart was so heavy that no farther sadness could be
gained; and this nourishment of grief was every day applied. “Know him! To atone for this conduct therefore, Elinor
took immediate possession of the post of civility which she had
assigned herself, behaved with the greatest attention to Mrs. “I do not see how it can be done,” said she, “without affronting Lady
Middleton, for they spend every day with her; otherwise I should be
exceedingly glad to do it. Elton is shewing
your picture to his mother and sisters, telling how much more beautiful
is the original, and after being asked for it five or six times,
allowing them to hear your name, your own dear name.”

“My picture!—But he has left my picture in Bond-street.”

“Has he so!—Then I know nothing of Mr. Elton, the lover of Harriet, was professing himself
_her_ lover. Emma knew what was coming; they must have the
letter over again, and settle how long he had been gone, and how much
he was engaged in company, and what a favourite he was wherever he
went, and how full the Master of the Ceremonies’ ball had been; and she
went through it very well, with all the interest and all the
commendation that could be requisite, and always putting forward to
prevent Harriet’s being obliged to say a word. Mr. One takes up a notion, and runs away with it. But how little of permanent happiness could belong to
a couple who were only brought together because their passions were
stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture. Weston, that excellent Mr. “And if they really _do_ interest themselves,”
said Marianne, in her new character of candour, “in bringing about a
reconciliation, I shall think that even John and Fanny are not entirely
without merit.”

After a visit on Colonel Brandon’s side of only three or four days, the
two gentlemen quitted Barton together. Jennings had determined very early in
the seizure that Marianne would never get over it, and Colonel Brandon,
who was chiefly of use in listening to Mrs. yes—Mr. All field sports were over. she was as grateful as
possible, you may be sure. Dashwood, “to have
those kind of yearly drains on one’s income. One can see that she
feels the want of encouragement. The intelligence, which had been so anxiously announced to
her, she was now to be anxiously announcing to another. The mischief of neglect and
mistaken indulgence towards such a girl--oh! It was horrible to Emma to think how it
must sink him in the general opinion, to foresee the smiles, the
sneers, the merriment it would prompt at his expense; the mortification
and disdain of his brother, the thousand inconveniences to
himself.—Could it be?—No; it was impossible. It is as
often applied to feelings which arise only from a half hour’s
acquaintance, as to a real, strong attachment. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the
hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to
wonder at her being where she was. How the delicacy, the discretion
of his favourite could have been so lain asleep! Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk
by herself. I dare say we shall be all safe at Hartfield before
midnight.”

Mr. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.”

[Illustration:

“She is tolerable”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Which do you mean?” and turning round, he looked for a moment at
Elizabeth, till, catching her eye, he withdrew his own, and coldly said,
“She is tolerable: but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; and I am in no
humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted
by other men. John Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh: she could not help
feeling it hard that as Mrs. Marianne
slowly continued,—

“It is a great relief to me—what Elinor told me this morning—I have now
heard exactly what I wished to hear.”—For some moments her voice was
lost; but recovering herself, she added, and with greater calmness than
before—“I am now perfectly satisfied, I wish for no change. “It must not be thought of. Edward, having carried his thanks to Colonel Brandon, proceeded with
his happiness to Lucy; and such was the excess of it by the time he
reached Bartlett’s Buildings, that she was able to assure Mrs. The visit
afforded her many pleasant recollections the next day; and all that she
might be supposed to have lost on the side of dignified seclusion, must
be amply repaid in the splendour of popularity. Weston’s time of life?”

“There is no saying, indeed,” replied Harriet rather solemnly. “What felicity it is to hear a tune again which _has_ made one
happy!—If I mistake not that was danced at Weymouth.”

She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply, and played
something else. “No—Mrs. Bennet. Mr. But I
only mean to say that there are advertising offices, and that by
applying to them I should have no doubt of very soon meeting with
something that would do.”

“Something that would do!” repeated Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned
instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations’ behaviour to the
remarks of the two ladies and Mr. English verdure,
English culture, English comfort, seen under a sun bright, without
being oppressive. La! I do not know her, even by sight.”

“I can answer for every thing of that nature, sir, because it will be
under Mrs. Emma will be happy to
entertain you. Bennet give up the point. A party was formed this evening for going on the following day to see a
very fine place about twelve miles from Barton, belonging to a
brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon, without whose interest it could not
be seen, as the proprietor, who was then abroad, had left strict orders
on that head. I am here
till claimed by Colonel and Mrs. Sir
John Middleton was a good looking man about forty. Weston is almost an old
man. You know not, you can
scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me; though it was some time, I
confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice.”

“I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an
impression. He had still a small house in Highbury,
where most of his leisure days were spent; and between useful
occupation and the pleasures of society, the next eighteen or twenty
years of his life passed cheerfully away. Darcy. I shall see her again! and Mrs. Harriet had been at Hartfield,
as usual, soon after breakfast; and, after a time, had gone home to
return again to dinner: she returned, and sooner than had been talked
of, and with an agitated, hurried look, announcing something
extraordinary to have happened which she was longing to tell. Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr. “It is enough,” said she; “to say that he is unlike Fanny is enough. Cole on business an hour and a half ago. “Knightley!” continued Mrs. It happened to catch Sophia’s eye before it
caught mine—and its size, the elegance of the paper, the hand-writing
altogether, immediately gave her a suspicion. Emma and Harriet went together; Miss Bates and her niece, with
the Eltons; the gentlemen on horseback. Do you not know that such a
report is spread abroad?”

“I never heard that it was.”

“And can you likewise declare, that there is no _foundation_ for it?”

“I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your Ladyship. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help
repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister. He saw no
fault in the room, he would acknowledge none which they suggested. “You like it, my Emma, as little as I feared.—I wish our opinions were
the same. It amazes
me, I confess; for certainly there can be nothing so advantageous to
them as instruction. I had narrowly observed her, during the two visits
which I had lately made her here; and I was convinced of her affection.”

“And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction to
him.”

“It did. But perhaps you young ladies may not care
about the beaux, and had as lief be without them as with them. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have
a daughter married before I have, and that Longbourn estate is just as
much entailed as ever. It would not have been
the awkwardness of a moment, it would have been rather a pleasure,
previous to the suspicions of this very day; she could have talked to
him of Harriet, and the three-quarters of a mile would have seemed but
one. Her friends
evidently thought this good enough for her; and it _was_ good enough. how he must have felt it!”

“I never saw anyone so shocked. “You and Miss Smith, and Miss Fairfax, will be three, and the two Miss
Coxes five,” had been repeated many times over. They were always moving from place to place in quest of a
cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought. Some more of the
Careys came to dinner, and they had the pleasure of sitting down nearly
twenty to table, which Sir John observed with great contentment. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. are quite well.”

“But you--how are you?” cried Elizabeth. I am
     sure you will be very comfortable there. On
that article, truth seemed attainable. and I have often wished—but it is so little one can
venture to do—small, trifling presents, of any thing uncommon—Now we
have killed a porker, and Emma thinks of sending them a loin or a leg;
it is very small and delicate—Hartfield pork is not like any other
pork—but still it is pork—and, my dear Emma, unless one could be sure
of their making it into steaks, nicely fried, as ours are fried,
without the smallest grease, and not roast it, for no stomach can bear
roast pork—I think we had better send the leg—do not you think so, my
dear?”

“My dear papa, I sent the whole hind-quarter. And to the pang of a friend disgracing
herself, and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction
that it was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot
she had chosen. Elton, immediately
afterwards. His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect: but she
could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or
feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. So then he was monstrous happy, and
talked on some time about what they should do, and they agreed he
should take orders directly, and they must wait to be married till he
got a living. I was not aware of it
myself. In such moments of precious, invaluable misery, she rejoiced in tears
of agony to be at Cleveland; and as she returned by a different circuit
to the house, feeling all the happy privilege of country liberty, of
wandering from place to place in free and luxurious solitude, she
resolved to spend almost every hour of every day while she remained
with the Palmers, in the indulgence of such solitary rambles. But, perhaps, Mr. Well _that_ is an odd kind of
delicacy! “If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside,” cried Bingley, “it
would not make them one jot less agreeable.”

“But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any
consideration in the world,” replied Darcy. I did not know what to do. Darcy and herself. But for that reason, I should imagine
the likeness must be chiefly confined to the females, for boys have
very little teaching after an early age, and scramble into any hand
they can get. She would not look again. Impudence, I know that very well, and I was determined
to find out _where_ you had been to. She still cherished a
very tender affection for Bingley. Emma felt that she could not do too much for her, that Harriet
had a right to all her ingenuity and all her patience; but it was heavy
work to be for ever convincing without producing any effect, for ever
agreed to, without being able to make their opinions the same. I
was exceedingly pleased to hear that Mrs. You look as if you would not do such a thing
again.”

“Oh! Weston that he had been proposing to Mrs. While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend
the day with them. At length, however, Mrs. But from one cause or
another, I gave it up in disgust. Elton was
growing impatient to name the day, and settle with Mr. They must
both have suffered a great deal under such a system of secresy and
concealment.”

“_His_ sufferings,” replied Emma dryly, “do not appear to have done him
much harm. “If he does not come to me, _then_,” said she, “I shall give him up for
ever.”

The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have
answered her hopes; but, alas! Their society can afford no pleasure
that will atone for such wretchedness as this! They are some of my very
old friends. The aunt and niece seemed
both escaping into the adjoining room. Anne is the only person that
knows of it, and she has no judgment at all; indeed, she does me a
great deal more harm than good, for I am in constant fear of her
betraying me. I knew the name, the place, I knew all about it, and
instantly saw what she had been doing. Latterly, however—for some
time, indeed—I have had no idea of their meaning any thing.—I thought
them a habit, a trick, nothing that called for seriousness on my side. There is not one of his tenants or servants but what will
give him a good name. Ferrars would say and do, though there could not be a
doubt of its nature, she was anxious to hear; and still more anxious to
know how Edward would conduct himself. I wish as
well as every body else to be perfectly happy; but, like every body
else it must be in my own way. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival, but
without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now
determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. He had just compunction enough
for having done nothing for his sisters himself, to be exceedingly
anxious that everybody else should do a great deal; and an offer from
Colonel Brandon, or a legacy from Mrs. Weston. If he had but my picture, he says he should be easy. Well, it don’t signify
talking; but when a young man, be who he will, comes and makes love to
a pretty girl, and promises marriage, he has no business to fly off
from his word only because he grows poor, and a richer girl is ready to
have him. Weston was chatty
and convivial, and no friend to early separations of any sort; but at
last the drawing-room party did receive an augmentation. No second meeting had there yet been between him and Emma. The supposition did not pain her. He called her ‘Augusta.’
How delightful!”

When the visit was returned, Emma made up her mind. CHAPTER XVIII


Time passed on. Lydia
talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the
fish she had won; and Mr. I never could have supposed it. To her
it was but the natural consequence of a strong affection in a young and
ardent mind. She was not obliged to hear. Elton had only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirits, not at
all to confuse his intellects. Or, perhaps she may not have resources enough
in herself to be qualified for a country life. She promised to think of
it, and advised him to think of it more; but he was fully convinced,
that no reflection could alter his wishes or his opinion on the
subject. To
see Marianne, I felt, would be dreadful, and I even doubted whether I
could see her again, and keep to my resolution. The apothecary came; and having
examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught a
violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;
advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. Jennings, “I am sure he should be very
welcome to bed and board at my house; and so I would tell him if I
could see him. Knightley and
Robert Martin was, at this moment, so strong to Emma’s feelings, and so
strong was the recollection of all that had so recently passed on
Harriet’s side, so fresh the sound of those words, spoken with such
emphasis, “No, I hope I know better than to think of Robert Martin,”
that she was really expecting the intelligence to prove, in some
measure, premature. He did trace them easily to Clapham, but
no farther; for on entering that place, they removed into a
hackney-coach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom. “Mr. “Can you deny that you have done it?” she repeated. Darcy walk into the
room. It had just occurred to Mrs. Putting away the letter immediately, and forcing a smile, she said,--

“I did not know before that you ever walked this way.”

“I have been making the tour of the park,” he replied, “as I generally
do every year, and intended to close it with a call at the Parsonage. What sister would think
herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very
objectionable? It is the greatest of favours
when Miss De Bourgh comes in.”

“I like her appearance,” said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. He wanted to marry well, and having the
arrogance to raise his eyes to her, pretended to be in love; but she
was perfectly easy as to his not suffering any disappointment that need
be cared for. “And this is always the way with him,” she added. “I see what a life I am to lead among you. He was quite delighted. An intimate acquaintance of Mrs. And after such
success, you know!—Every body said that Mr. A man must be very much in
love, indeed, to describe her so. All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. Mr. Emma hung about
him affectionately, and smiled, and said it must be so; and that he
must not class her with Isabella and Mrs. Mrs. Certainly,
delicate ladies have very extraordinary constitutions, Mrs. For where she _does_
dislike, I know it is most violent.”

Elinor was prevented from making any reply to this civil triumph, by
the door’s being thrown open, the servant’s announcing Mr. Do you really think it a bad thing?—why so?”

“I think they will neither of them do the other any good.”

“You surprize me! By their uncertain light she thought she could discern it to be drawn
by four horses; and this, while it told the excess of her poor mother’s
alarm, gave some explanation to such unexpected rapidity. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its _being
created_?”

“I am,” said he, with a firm voice. She had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to
herself, as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over, as she was
desirous that Marianne should not receive the first notice of it from
the public papers, which she saw her eagerly examining every morning. Bennet
thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first
coming to London, before they procured lodgings. His perception of the striking improvement of
Harriet’s manner, since her introduction at Hartfield, was not one of
the least agreeable proofs of his growing attachment. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.”

She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had
intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter. I am sure they will like her
extremely; and when she gets a little acquainted with them, her fears
will completely wear off, for there really is nothing in the manners of
either but what is highly conciliating.—I shall have her very often
indeed while they are with me, and I dare say we shall sometimes find a
seat for her in the barouche-landau in some of our exploring parties.”

“Poor Jane Fairfax!”—thought Emma.—“You have not deserved this. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but
she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no
longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters’ beauty and her own,
it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without
much reluctance. She likes to have the distinction of rank
preserved.”

While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different
doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much
objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Collins knew not what to make of him. Dixon’s name as well as her own, to press their coming over directly,
and they would give them the meeting in Dublin, and take them back to
their country seat, Baly-craig, a beautiful place, I fancy. Clement’s, because Wickham’s lodgings were in
that parish. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their
brother’s manners there was something better than politeness--there was
good-humour and kindness. Lydia, my love, ring the bell. She was received with a cordial respect which could
not but please, and given all the consequence she could wish for. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought
to do?”

“Oh, yes! Mr. Oh, how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she
had ever encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards
him! Mrs. Good bye,—God bless
you!”

And with these words, he almost ran out of the room. She endeavoured to secure Jane in
her interest, but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined
interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and
sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. You find me trying to be
useful; tell me if you think I shall succeed.”

“What!” said Mrs. She was delighted with the
fortitude of her little friend—for fortitude she knew it was in her to
give up being in company and stay at home; and she could now invite the
very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth, Jane Fairfax.—
Since her last conversation with Mrs. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from
exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she
considered it as the death-warrant of all possibility of common sense
for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her, were it
known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her
go. Had I sat down to wish for any possible good to my
family, I should have fixed on Colonel Brandon’s marrying one of you as
the object most desirable. Robinson: did not
I mention it to you? But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my
sister’s absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of
pleasure realized. And when you get
there, you must tell him at what time you would have him come for you
again; and you had better name an early hour. He only means—”

“He and I should differ very little in our estimation of the two,”
interrupted she, with a sort of serious smile—“much less, perhaps, than
he is aware of, if we could enter without ceremony or reserve on the
subject.”

“Emma, my dear Emma—”

“Oh!” she cried with more thorough gaiety, “if you fancy your brother
does not do me justice, only wait till my dear father is in the secret,
and hear his opinion. Weston; but not all that either could say could prevent some renewal of
alarm at the sight of the snow which had actually fallen, and the
discovery of a much darker night than he had been prepared for. Good
gracious! Mr. Mr. It did appear—there was no concealing
it—exactly like the pretence of being in love with her, instead of
Harriet; an inconstancy, if real, the most contemptible and abominable! Ferrars was married, Thomas?”

“I see Mr. She was, besides,
which was the worst of all, so cold, so cautious! Did I
imitate your forbearance, or lessen your restraints, by taking any part
in those offices of general complaisance or particular gratitude which
you had hitherto been left to discharge alone? They were natural and just. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. Mr. Bennet! Weston tell you?”—said Emma, still perplexed. Darcy’s
character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would
always prevent his exposing the son. Jennings, nor
Sir John, nor even Mrs. Elton,
and any other of his neighbours.—He could not see any objection at all
to his, and Emma’s, and Harriet’s going there some very fine morning. I used to
be quite angry with Selina; but really I begin now to comprehend that a
married woman has many things to call her attention. ‘_There_,
to be sure,’ said she, ‘I might have thought myself safe.’ She was
quite in an agony. Elizabeth hoped she had
silenced him; but he soon afterwards said,--

“I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. It is not fit that he should be living about at his own
charge now, at lodgings and taverns.”

Elinor’s heart thanked her for such kindness towards Edward, though she
could not forbear smiling at the form of it. Whenever I see her, she always
curtseys and asks me how I do, in a very pretty manner; and when you
have had her here to do needlework, I observe she always turns the lock
of the door the right way and never bangs it. She would not be
ashamed of the appearance of the penitence, so justly and truly hers. Harriet behaved extremely well on the occasion, with great
self-command. Mrs. “What a pity it is, Elinor,” said Marianne, “that Edward should have no
taste for drawing.”

“No taste for drawing!” replied Elinor, “why should you think so? Bingley,” cried his wife. Mr. You have drawn two pretty pictures;
but I think there may be a third—a something between the do-nothing and
the do-all. Mrs. It was gratitude;--gratitude, not merely for having once
loved her, but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the
petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the
unjust accusations accompanying her rejection. Woodhouse saw
the letter, and he says he never saw such a handsome letter in his
life.”

It was, indeed, a highly prized letter. My card was not lost, I hope.”

“But have you not received my notes?” cried Marianne in the wildest
anxiety. “But then at other
times I have not resolution enough for it. The evil
day was put off. This has
always been your doctrine, I am sure.”

“No, Marianne, never. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man, within
the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie more
effectually to what they related? Weston and her companion taking leave also, could
allow themselves only to walk with the two young ladies to Hartfield
gates, before they set off for Randalls. Find some body for me. Late hours do not agree with us. But she soon saw how likely it
was that Lucy, in her self-provident care, in her haste to secure him,
should overlook every thing but the risk of delay. True affection only could have prompted it.”

Emma wished he would be less pointed, yet could not help being amused;
and when on glancing her eye towards Jane Fairfax she caught the
remains of a smile, when she saw that with all the deep blush of
consciousness, there had been a smile of secret delight, she had less
scruple in the amusement, and much less compunction with respect to
her.—This amiable, upright, perfect Jane Fairfax was apparently
cherishing very reprehensible feelings. I have some little concern in the business, as well as
yourself, for Lucy Steele is my cousin, and I believe there is not a
better kind of girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
husband.”

John Dashwood was greatly astonished; but his nature was calm, not open
to provocation, and he never wished to offend anybody, especially
anybody of good fortune. Mrs. No!—she was more and more
convinced that Mrs. He
promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each
have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. Did you, on reading it, give any credit to its
contents?”

She explained what its effects on her had been, and how gradually all
her former prejudices had been removed. Mrs. He wished the road might be impassable,
that he might be able to keep them all at Randalls; and with the utmost
good-will was sure that accommodation might be found for every body,
calling on his wife to agree with him, that with a little contrivance,
every body might be lodged, which she hardly knew how to do, from the
consciousness of there being but two spare rooms in the house. She had never boasted either beauty or cleverness. The repose of the latter became more and more disturbed; and her
sister, who watched, with unremitting attention her continual change of
posture, and heard the frequent but inarticulate sounds of complaint
which passed her lips, was almost wishing to rouse her from so painful
a slumber, when Marianne, suddenly awakened by some accidental noise in
the house, started hastily up, and, with feverish wildness, cried out,—

“Is mama coming?”

“Not yet,” cried the other, concealing her terror, and assisting
Marianne to lie down again, “but she will be here, I hope, before it is
long. “I think, Elinor,” she presently added, “we must employ Edward to take
care of us in our return to Barton. Hurst
nothing at all. I shall always have a great
regard for the Miss Martins, especially Elizabeth, and should be very
sorry to give them up, for they are quite as well educated as me. He has the tenderest spirit of
gallantry towards us all!—You must let me read it to him.”

Harriet looked grave. I perfectly
remember it.—Stop; Mr. The heat was excessive; he had never suffered any thing
like it—almost wished he had staid at home—nothing killed him like
heat—he could bear any degree of cold, etc., but heat was
intolerable—and he sat down, at the greatest possible distance from the
slight remains of Mr. Jane looked a little
paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. She looked on with some amusement.—Miss Bates’s gratitude for Mrs. and it was not wholly without foundation. THE END Is _her_ husband, who is the son
of his late father’s steward, to be his brother? He called
for a few moments, just to leave a piece of paper on the table
containing, as he said, a charade, which a friend of his had addressed
to a young lady, the object of his admiration, but which, from his
manner, Emma was immediately convinced must be his own. From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor, and when
entered on by Lucy, who seldom missed an opportunity of introducing it,
and was particularly careful to inform her confidante, of her happiness
whenever she received a letter from Edward, it was treated by the
former with calmness and caution, and dismissed as soon as civility
would allow; for she felt such conversations to be an indulgence which
Lucy did not deserve, and which were dangerous to herself. If, indeed, it should be so! In that point, however, and that only, he erred; for though
Lucy soon gave him hopes that his eloquence would convince her in
_time_, another visit, another conversation, was always wanted to
produce this conviction. There is no talk of his
coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of
everybody, too, who is likely to know.”

[Illustration:

     “I am determined never to speak of it again”
]

“I do not believe that he will ever live at Netherfield any more.”

“Oh, well! Our respected father, as you well know, bequeathed all the
Stanhill effects that remained at Norland (and very valuable they were)
to your mother. Weston, to
remove. For the rest of his character and habits, they
were marked, as far as Elinor could perceive, with no traits at all
unusual in his sex and time of life. They have more gentleness. “You are joking, Lizzy. The events of this evening were not very remarkable. The effect of his discourse on the lady too, could not escape her
observation, for though she was too honorable to listen, and had even
changed her seat, on purpose that she might _not_ hear, to one close by
the piano forte on which Marianne was playing, she could not keep
herself from seeing that Elinor changed colour, attended with
agitation, and was too intent on what he said to pursue her employment. She
had ventured only one glance at Darcy. “Of music! Four bed-rooms and two garrets formed the rest
of the house. Knightley.—Neither would
she regret that he should be going to Brunswick Square, for she knew
how much his visit would be enjoyed—but it might have happened at a
better time—and to have had longer notice of it, would have been
pleasanter.—They parted thorough friends, however; she could not be
deceived as to the meaning of his countenance, and his unfinished
gallantry;—it was all done to assure her that she had fully recovered
his good opinion.—He had been sitting with them half an hour, she
found. Elton appeared; and all the smiles and the proprieties
passed. Elizabeth
had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat
down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the
impudence of an impudent man. _one_ is my wealth! Elinor assured him that she did;—that she forgave, pitied, wished him
well—was even interested in his happiness—and added some gentle counsel
as to the behaviour most likely to promote it. Knightley shook his head at her. Philips,
appears to do so much credit to; but he gave up everything to be of use
to the late Mr. “If one could but go to Brighton!” observed Mrs. After winding
along it for more than a mile, they reached their own house. To Mr. Elton over and over
again—and I am sure I had no more idea that she would change her
mind!—but that good Mrs. Has he deigned to add aught of civility to his
ordinary style? I am not
at leisure to remain with you longer. Be so kind as to apologize for us to Miss Darcy. While they were thus comfortably occupied, Mr. I
thank you for explaining it so fully. I would not have Mr. so much the man of fashion! In short, it ended in a total breach. I inquired after their brother, of course. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. Mrs. “I was just going to
tell you of our agreeable surprize in seeing him arrive this morning. Weston earned every
present comfort before he endeavoured to gain it.—Very true; he did not
come till Miss Fairfax was here.”

“And I have not forgotten,” said Emma, “how sure you were that he might
have come sooner if he would. Yes, yes, I
will go and see her, sure enough. Your dear mother
was so clever at all those things! “In essentials, I believe, he is very much
what he ever was.”

While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to
rejoice over her words or to distrust their meaning. Will that do? The expectation of seeing _her_, however, was enough
to make her interested in the engagement; for though she could now meet
Edward’s mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised to
attend such an introduction, though she could now see her with perfect
indifference as to her opinion of herself, her desire of being in
company with Mrs. After her entrance, Colonel Brandon became more thoughtful and silent
than he had been before, and Mrs. Perry was talked of,
and Harriet herself was too ill and low to resist the authority which
excluded her from this delightful engagement, though she could not
speak of her loss without many tears. When had his influence, such influence begun?—
When had he succeeded to that place in her affection, which Frank
Churchill had once, for a short period, occupied?—She looked back; she
compared the two—compared them, as they had always stood in her
estimation, from the time of the latter’s becoming known to her—and as
they must at any time have been compared by her, had it—oh! The weather was most favourable for her; though Christmas Day, she
could not go to church. Either bathing has been of the greatest service to
her, or else it is to be attributed to an excellent embrocation of Mr. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and Maria. I must speak to Hill this
moment.”

“It is _not_ Mr. Frank Churchill, indeed! Is this fair, Mrs. Jane actually on the point of going as governess! The very last evening was spent
there; and her Ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of
their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing,
and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right
way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the
work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh. Quite
otherwise indeed, if I understood Miss Fairfax’s opinion last night.”

“Do come with me,” said Mrs. I told Mrs. But, perhaps—I may be equally in the
way here. Wait only till tomorrow.”

With difficulty however could she prevent her from following him
herself; and to persuade her to check her agitation, to wait, at least,
with the appearance of composure, till she might speak to him with more
privacy and more effect, was impossible; for Marianne continued
incessantly to give way in a low voice to the misery of her feelings,
by exclamations of wretchedness. She did unfeignedly and unequivocally regret
the inferiority of her own playing and singing. She liked him, however, upon the whole, much
better than she had expected, and in her heart was not sorry that she
could like him no more;—not sorry to be driven by the observation of
his Epicurism, his selfishness, and his conceit, to rest with
complacency on the remembrance of Edward’s generous temper, simple
taste, and diffident feelings. I can safely say that he has never gave me one moment’s alarm
on that account from the first.”

Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at this assertion. It is enough to know they are discovered: I have seen them
     both----”

     [Illustration:

“But perhaps you would like to read it”

     [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

     “Then it is as I always hoped,” cried Jane: “they are married!”

     Elizabeth read on: “I have seen them both. But in an instant arose the
dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted, for Mr. It seemed as if every thing united to promise the most
interesting consequences. so
genteel and so easy! Elton?”

“If you please, my dear. The impossibility of her quitting her
father, Mr. He does not think of the
draught. It is highly improper. Jane will be treated with
such regard and kindness!—It will be nothing but pleasure, a life of
pleasure.—And her salary!—I really cannot venture to name her salary to
you, Miss Woodhouse. We do not often look upon fine young men, well-bred and
agreeable. _My_
gratitude will be insured immediately by any information tending to
that end, and _hers_ must be gained by it in time. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I dare say they often think of you, and
wonder which will be the day, the precise day of the instrument’s
coming to hand. Woodhouse had confined them to a foot-pace. We must wait, it may be for
many years. We all love to
instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing. “No, none at all,” he replied, and read on. Palmer ate their dinner, and no expectation of
pleasure from them in any other way. Perhaps he wanted to
speak to her, of his attachment to Harriet; he might be watching for
encouragement to begin.—She did not, could not, feel equal to lead the
way to any such subject. Woodhouse to remove with her to Donwell; he had wanted to
believe it feasible, but his knowledge of Mr. here’s Miss Woodhouse.—Dear Miss Woodhouse, how do you
do?—Very well I thank you, quite well. Many vain solicitudes would be
prevented—many awkwardnesses smoothed by it. Such an evening! [Illustration: “I’m the tallest”]




[Illustration:

     “He rode a black horse”
]




CHAPTER III. Now, it would be
really having Frank in their neighbourhood. The Collinses will turn us out, before he is cold
in his grave; and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what
we shall do.”

They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. I cannot remember the time when I did not love Eliza; and
my affection for her, as we grew up, was such, as perhaps, judging from
my present forlorn and cheerless gravity, you might think me incapable
of having ever felt. he told me all about it; that Jane Fairfax and Mr. But, no,” recollecting
herself, “that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to
me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.”

This was a lucky recollection--it saved her from something like regret. “Good heaven! Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of Casino to the others. Knightley will be happy. He is such a charming man, that it is quite a pity he should
be so grave and so dull. “I am glad,” said Lady Middleton to Lucy, “you are not going to finish
poor little Annamaria’s basket this evening; for I am sure it must hurt
your eyes to work filigree by candlelight. Mrs. Woodhouse’s first exclamation, and all that he could say for some time. To her he looked for comfort; and her assurances of safety, her
representation of the excellence of the horses, and of James, and of
their having so many friends about them, revived him a little. Mr. CHAPTER VIII


Frank Churchill came back again; and if he kept his father’s dinner
waiting, it was not known at Hartfield; for Mrs. Weston could part
with him. Two days passed away from the time of Mr. how Charlotte and I did stuff the only time we were
there! She was sensible and clever; but eager in everything: her sorrows, her
joys, could have no moderation. My avowed one, or what I avowed to
myself, was to see whether your sister was still partial to Bingley, and
if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made.”

“Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to
befall her?”

“I am more likely to want time than courage, Elizabeth. Their good friend saw that
Marianne was unhappy, and felt that every thing was due to her which
might make her at all less so. Weston’s parting injunction; spoken with some anxiety, and meant only
for her. Bingley
from your sister,--and the other, that I had, in defiance of various
claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate
prosperity and blasted the prospects of Mr. She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that
Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydia had
wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Smith, who, by stating his marriage with a woman of character, as
the source of her clemency, gave him reason for believing that had he
behaved with honour towards Marianne, he might at once have been happy
and rich. On that head,
therefore, I shall be uniformly silent: and you may assure yourself that
no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married.”

It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now. Mrs. Like half the rest of the world, if more than half there be
that are clever and good, Marianne, with excellent abilities and an
excellent disposition, was neither reasonable nor candid. They were soon joined by some of the gentlemen; and the very first of
the early was Frank Churchill. I hope you
turned directly.”

“I went only to the post-office,” said she, “and reached home before
the rain was much. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.”

“My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them; by which
means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.”

“Your humility, Mr. K.—But I will promise,” she added presently, laughing
and blushing—“I will promise to call you once by your Christian name. These parties were acceptable to
all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did
think than such as did not. But
this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently
affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner;
and in the evening Mrs. you have had every care and anxiety
upon yourself alone.”

“Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every
fatigue, I am sure, but I did not think it right for either of them. Younge, in whose character we were
most unhappily deceived; and by her connivance and aid he so far
recommended himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a
strong impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she was
persuaded to believe herself in love and to consent to an elopement. I cannot let you continue in your
error; and yet, perhaps, since my manners gave such an impression, I
have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never have been
at all attached to the person we are speaking of, as it might be
natural for a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse.—But I
never have.”

He listened in perfect silence. Ferrars
must seem so odd, that it ought to be explained. [Illustration]

Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. They will soon be back again, and
then they’d be sure and call here.”

Mrs. He praised her for being
without art or affectation, for having simple, honest, generous,
feelings.—She knew that he saw such recommendations in Harriet; he had
dwelt on them to her more than once.—Much that lived in Harriet’s
memory, many little particulars of the notice she had received from
him, a look, a speech, a removal from one chair to another, a
compliment implied, a preference inferred, had been unnoticed, because
unsuspected, by Emma. She must abide by the evil of having
refused him, whatever it may be; and as to the refusal itself, I will
not pretend to say that I might not influence her a little; but I
assure you there was very little for me or for any body to do. and Mrs. _You_ are my cousins, and they are
my wife’s, so you must be related.”

But Sir John could not prevail. Knightley. Palmer
looked up on her entering the room, stared at her some minutes, and
then returned to his newspaper. I rather believe you are giving me more credit for
acuteness than I deserve. Perry’s coming.—Extraordinary dream, indeed!”

They were entering the hall. “Your promise makes me easy. Are the others coming out?”

“I do not know. This is just what Perry said. Many
circumstances might make it more eligible for them to be married
privately in town than to pursue their first plan; and even if _he_
could form such a design against a young woman of Lydia’s connections,
which is not likely, can I suppose her so lost to everything? Make
haste, and come down this moment.”

Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more;
and down they ran into the dining-room which fronted the lane, in quest
of this wonder; it was two ladies, stopping in a low phaeton at the
garden gate. I do not remember her name among the ladies at
court.”

“Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town;
and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine myself one day, has deprived
the British Court of its brightest ornament. Elton would have us come. “Your examination of Mr. I think we do want a larger
council. It was only necessary to mention any favourite amusement to engage her
to talk. Woodhouse’s agitation. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,
and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Elton, in your case, I should certainly excuse myself. It was
not in compliment to Jane Fairfax however that he was so indifferent,
or so indignant; he was not guided by _her_ feelings in reprobating the
ball, for _she_ enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary degree. ‘Dearer, much dearer than ever.’ I hope he may long continue to
feel all the value of such a reconciliation.—He is a very liberal
thanker, with his thousands and tens of thousands.—‘Happier than I
deserve.’ Come, he knows himself there. “Cautious, very cautious,” thought Emma; “he advances inch by inch, and
will hazard nothing till he believes himself secure.”

Still, however, though every thing had not been accomplished by her
ingenious device, she could not but flatter herself that it had been
the occasion of much present enjoyment to both, and must be leading
them forward to the great event. Weston, who had been
almost wholly engrossed by her attentions to him, was able to turn away
and welcome her dear Emma. As
bluntly as he could speak it, therefore, he told me that Marianne
Dashwood was dying of a putrid fever at Cleveland—a letter that morning
received from Mrs. Oh, _that_ abominable Mr. “Well done, Mrs. My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due
consideration for the advantage of all your family; and if my _manner_
has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologize.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXI. You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of
that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”

[Illustration:

“Such very superior dancing is not
often seen.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir
William’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his
eyes were directed, with a very serious expression, towards Bingley and
Jane, who were dancing together. “Oh yes!--if one could but go to Brighton! And she was only sixteen last June. When she is secure of him, there will be leisure for falling
in love as much as she chooses.”

“Your plan is a good one,” replied Elizabeth, “where nothing is in
question but the desire of being well married; and if I were determined
to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. They gradually ascended for
half a mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by
Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of the valley, into which
the road with some abruptness wound. Miss Nash had been
telling her something, which she repeated immediately with great
delight. Jennings, whose active good-nature
made her friendly and hospitable for other people as well as herself,
engaged with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the
course of a few weeks. I shall leave off while I am well.”

“Good morning to you,”—said he, rising and walking off abruptly. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Of course, he must be sorry to lose her—they must be all sorry. If he means any thing, it must be to
please you. He
seems to me to be grown particularly gentle of late. Dixon like Mr. On distinguishing the ladies of the group
the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual
civilities. His civilities to the other ladies must be paid; but his subsequent
object was to lament over himself for the heat he was suffering, and
the walk he had had for nothing. But Mr. Hurst and her
sister scarcely opened their mouths except to complain of fatigue, and
were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. Frank Churchill; I never saw any
thing equal to it.”

“Oh! Might not the evening end in a dance? This,
however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time
comfortably enough: there were half hours of pleasant conversation with
Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year, that she
had often great enjoyment out of doors. At present, if I could be
satisfied on one point, if I could be allowed to think that he was not
_always_ acting a part, not _always_ deceiving me; but above all, if I
could be assured that he never was so _very_ wicked as my fears have
sometimes fancied him, since the story of that unfortunate girl—”

She stopt. She was pretty too—at least I thought so
_then;_ and I had seen so little of other women, that I could make no
comparisons, and see no defects. The other circumstance of regret related also to Jane Fairfax; and
there she had no doubt. Charlotte
herself was tolerably composed. The darling wish of his
sisters was then gratified: he bought an estate in a neighbouring county
to Derbyshire; and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source
of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other. It is a
certainty. Knightley perhaps, from being used to the large
parties of London, may not quite enter into our feelings.”

“I know nothing of the large parties of London, sir—I never dine with
any body.”

“Indeed! Jane, who was not so light, nor so much in the habit of running as
Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath,
came up with him, and eagerly cried out,--

“Oh, papa, what news? When he was here before, we made the best
of it; but there was a good deal of wet, damp, cheerless weather; there
always is in February, you know, and we could not do half that we
intended. She took them all most
affectionately by the hand, and expressed great delight in seeing them
again. She feared that under this persuasion she had been unjust,
inattentive, nay, almost unkind, to her Elinor;—that Marianne’s
affliction, because more acknowledged, more immediately before her, had
too much engrossed her tenderness, and led her away to forget that in
Elinor she might have a daughter suffering almost as much, certainly
with less self-provocation, and greater fortitude. She was the first to announce it to Mr. Miss Woodhouse looks as if she did not want me. Emma’s sense of right however had decided it; and
besides the consideration of what was due to each brother, she had
particular pleasure, from the circumstance of the late disagreement
between Mr. [Illustration:

     “Conjecturing as to the date”
]




CHAPTER XLIII. and Mrs. Ferrars at Longstaple?”

“At Longstaple!” he replied, with an air of surprise. “It may, perhaps, be pleasant,” replied Charlotte, “to be able to impose
on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be
so very guarded. I have observed, Mrs. Jennings. Knightley. Miss Smith, and Miss Bickerton, another parlour boarder at Mrs. It
cannot be concealed from anyone. Weston, unasked, promised to get Frank over
to join them, if possible; a proof of approbation and gratitude which
could have been dispensed with.—Mr. “Oh! Her astonishment at his coming--at his
coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again,
was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered
behaviour in Derbyshire. Jennings at the door in her way to the carriage, as he
came to leave his farewell card; and she, after apologising for not
returning herself, had obliged him to enter, by saying that Miss
Dashwood was above, and wanted to speak with him on very particular
business. From this day you must
be a stranger to one of your parents. Lord bless me! I
give you this caution now, because I shall never speak to you again on
the subject. and Mrs. We have already
agreed that secrecy may be necessary, and we must acknowledge that it
could not be maintained if their correspondence were to pass through
Sir John’s hands.”

Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and she tried to find in it a
motive sufficient for their silence. Well, sir, the time must come when you will be
paid for all this, when you will have little labour and great
enjoyment.”

“My first enjoyment,” replied John Knightley, as they passed through
the sweep-gate, “will be to find myself safe at Hartfield again.”




CHAPTER XIV


Some change of countenance was necessary for each gentleman as they
walked into Mrs. They stood a little
aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,
scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she
returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Without his sanction I could not hope to be listened to again.—I
spoke; circumstances were in my favour; the late event had softened
away his pride, and he was, earlier than I could have anticipated,
wholly reconciled and complying; and could say at last, poor man! “Sometimes.” continued Lucy, after wiping her eyes, “I think whether it
would not be better for us both to break off the matter entirely.” As
she said this, she looked directly at her companion. _She_ was a little
occupied in weighing her own feelings, and trying to understand the
degree of her agitation, which she rather thought was considerable. Mrs. Willoughby? Encouraged by this to a further examination of his opinions,
she proceeded to question him on the subject of books; her favourite
authors were brought forward and dwelt upon with so rapturous a
delight, that any young man of five and twenty must have been
insensible indeed, not to become an immediate convert to the excellence
of such works, however disregarded before. Palmer was not in the house.”

“Had they told me,” he cried with vehemence, “that Mr. No lurking horrors were to upbraid him
for his easy credulity. Jennings, you see. Emma’s project of forgetting Mr. Poor old
John, I have a great regard for him; he was clerk to my poor father
twenty-seven years; and now, poor old man, he is bed-ridden, and very
poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints—I must go and see him
to-day; and so will Jane, I am sure, if she gets out at all. Women fancy admiration means more than
it does.”

“And men take care that they should.”

“If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea
of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.”

“I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had
been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part of
his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and
miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he
had merely kept the necessary terms without forming at it any useful
acquaintance. It is, I believe, too little yielding; certainly too little for the
convenience of the world. Woodhouse, who did not like that any one should share with him in
Isabella’s first day. You were very bad with the measles; that is, you would
have been very bad, but for Perry’s great attention. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the
appearance of it.”

“I never thought Mr. What you direct in this house cannot be wrong. You tear them to pieces.”

“Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,” said her father; “she times
them ill.”

“I do not cough for my own amusement,” replied Kitty, fretfully. Weston to him—not in the least suspecting that
she was addressing a lover.—“The expression of the eye is most correct,
but Miss Smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes. Philips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
woman, and a great favourite with her Longbourn nieces. Dashwood, accidentally taking up a volume of
Shakespeare, exclaimed,

“We have never finished Hamlet, Marianne; our dear Willoughby went away
before we could get through it. Coles, who would force themselves anywhere; neither could
she feel any right of preference herself—she submitted, therefore, and
only questioned Miss Bates farther as to her niece’s appetite and diet,
which she longed to be able to assist. “But, however, _one_ thing
must be considered. Their estate
was large, and their residence was at Norland Park, in the centre of
their property, where, for many generations, they had lived in so
respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of their
surrounding acquaintance. But the family are all rich
together. “Certainly,” said Elinor; “he seems very agreeable.”

“Well—I am so glad you do. Her kindness
is not sympathy; her good-nature is not tenderness. If the strength of your
reciprocal attachment had failed, as between many people, and under
many circumstances it naturally would during a four years’ engagement,
your situation would have been pitiable, indeed.”

Lucy here looked up; but Elinor was careful in guarding her countenance
from every expression that could give her words a suspicious tendency. Were you often in the same
society?”

At this moment they were approaching Ford’s, and he hastily exclaimed,
“Ha! Collins, I think? I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such
a way.”

“I can easily believe it. “Thank you for rousing me,” he replied. “Oh, my dear Lydia,” she cried, “when shall we meet again?”

“Oh, Lord! Why must their
marriage be private? Knightley and
Harriet!—It was an odd tête-à-tête; but she was glad to see it.—There
had been a time when he would have scorned her as a companion, and
turned from her with little ceremony. Darcy,
she saw, on looking up, that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. He must know
that the Woodhouses had been settled for several generations at
Hartfield, the younger branch of a very ancient family—and that the
Eltons were nobody. just the trifling,
silly fellow I took him for.” She had half a mind to resent; but an
instant’s observation convinced her that it was really said only to
relieve his own feelings, and not meant to provoke; and therefore she
let it pass. The lovers were standing together at one of the windows. It
was not merely in fine words or hyperbolical compliment that he paid
his duty; nothing could be more proper or pleasing than his whole
manner to her—nothing could more agreeably denote his wish of
considering her as a friend and securing her affection. My liveliness and your solidity would
produce perfection.—Not that I presume to insinuate, however, that
_some_ people may not think _you_ perfection already.—But hush!—not a
word, if you please.”

It seemed an unnecessary caution; Jane was wanting to give her words,
not to Mrs. Excuse me,--for I must speak plainly. She must have felt the improper and dangerous
distinction.”

“As to that—I do not—”

“Oh! Oh! We seem to have been designed for each
other.”

Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was
the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed
and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. They had frequently been staying with her in town. The night was cold and stormy. From that moment she doubted not of their being engaged to each
other; and the belief of it created no other surprise than that she, or
any of their friends, should be left by tempers so frank, to discover
it by accident. His manners, though serious, were mild; and his reserve appeared rather
the result of some oppression of spirits than of any natural gloominess
of temper. Her person was rather good; her face not unpretty;
but neither feature, nor air, nor voice, nor manner, were elegant. dear, yes,” before the gentleman joined
them. It was no more than the principals were prepared for; they
had calculated from the time of its being known at Randalls, how soon
it would be over Highbury; and were thinking of themselves, as the
evening wonder in many a family circle, with great sagacity. Soup too! CHAPTER XLIII. Bingley’s carriage immediately, and at
length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made. They had not long separated when Miss Bingley came towards her, and,
with an expression of civil disdain, thus accosted her,--

“So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham? But my feelings are not only cordial
towards _him_, they are even impartial towards Miss King. _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all! Nor was it under many, many minutes, that she could
comprehend what she heard, though not in general backward to credit what
was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a
lover to any of them. She read with an eagerness which
hardly left her power of comprehension; and from impatience of knowing
what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the
sense of the one before her eyes. Yet he is _such_ a man.”

“Yes, yes, they must marry. Then, if you
please, you shall send it all to Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon
after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words,--

“May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth,
when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the
course of this morning?”

Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs. You refuse, then, to oblige me. can he be deceitful?”

“I hope not, I believe not,” cried Elinor. Now, however, we must wish you and Mrs. Mrs. The carriage came: and Mr. So surprised at
their coming to town, though it was what she had rather expected all
along; so angry at their accepting her mother’s invitation after having
declined her own, though at the same time she would never have forgiven
them if they had not come! I answered it within an hour; but from
the confusion of my mind, and the multiplicity of business falling on
me at once, my answer, instead of being sent with all the many other
letters of that day, was locked up in my writing-desk; and I, trusting
that I had written enough, though but a few lines, to satisfy her,
remained without any uneasiness.—I was rather disappointed that I did
not hear from her again speedily; but I made excuses for her, and was
too busy, and—may I add?—too cheerful in my views to be captious.—We
removed to Windsor; and two days afterwards I received a parcel from
her, my own letters all returned!—and a few lines at the same time by
the post, stating her extreme surprize at not having had the smallest
reply to her last; and adding, that as silence on such a point could
not be misconstrued, and as it must be equally desirable to both to
have every subordinate arrangement concluded as soon as possible, she
now sent me, by a safe conveyance, all my letters, and requested, that
if I could not directly command hers, so as to send them to Highbury
within a week, I would forward them after that period to her at—: in
short, the full direction to Mr. Knightley—but justice
required that she should not be made unhappy by any coldness now,) gave
Emma the resolution to sit and endure farther with calmness, with even
apparent kindness.—For her own advantage indeed, it was fit that the
utmost extent of Harriet’s hopes should be enquired into; and Harriet
had done nothing to forfeit the regard and interest which had been so
voluntarily formed and maintained—or to deserve to be slighted by the
person, whose counsels had never led her right.—Rousing from
reflection, therefore, and subduing her emotion, she turned to Harriet
again, and, in a more inviting accent, renewed the conversation; for as
to the subject which had first introduced it, the wonderful story of
Jane Fairfax, that was quite sunk and lost.—Neither of them thought but
of Mr. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to
uncommon advantage. no friends? He coloured very deeply, and giving a
momentary glance at Elinor, replied, “Yes; it is my sister’s hair. I think everything has passed off uncommonly well, I
assure you. They seem very comfortable as
they are, and if she were to take any pains to marry him, she would
probably repent it. “You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny me
the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the
amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us
for one half hour.”

“Mr. Mrs. Colonel Brandon alone, of all the
party, heard her without being in raptures. It puts him quite out of heart.” Then taking a small miniature
from her pocket, she added, “To prevent the possibility of mistake, be
so good as to look at this face. Martin’s being no otherwise remembered,
than as he furnished a contrast with Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been
distinguished by his sisters. Do not let us
quarrel about the past. Arguments are too much like disputes. “I should
say so, but that I suppose there may be a hundred different ways of
being in love. I feel a strong persuasion, this morning, that I
shall soon be abroad. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. The colour which had been driven from her face returned for half a
minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to
her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and
wishes must still be unshaken; but she would not be secure. She regained
the street—happy in this, that though much had been forced on her
against her will, though she had in fact heard the whole substance of
Jane Fairfax’s letter, she had been able to escape the letter itself. The “How d’ye do’s” were quiet and
constrained on each side. Young ladies should take care of themselves.—Young ladies
are delicate plants. You are not serious? Jennings, “I am sure I shall be monstrous glad of
Miss Marianne’s company, whether Miss Dashwood will go or not, only the
more the merrier say I, and I thought it would be more comfortable for
them to be together; because, if they got tired of me, they might talk
to one another, and laugh at my odd ways behind my back. With respect to her father, it
was a question soon answered. I do not ask you to go with me, for I dare say your mind is too
full of the matter to care for company; and besides, you must long to
tell your sister all about it.”

Marianne had left the room before the conversation began. actually resolve to break with him entirely!—She felt the engagement to
be a source of repentance and misery to each—she dissolved it.—What a
view this gives of her sense of his behaviour!—Well, he must be a most
extraordinary—”

“Nay, nay, read on.—You will find how very much he suffers.”

“I hope he does,” replied Mr. One
enjoyment was certain--that of suitableness as companions; a
suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
inconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affection
and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were
disappointments abroad. You thought me then devoid of every proper
feeling, I am sure you did. Miss Bingley’s attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr. Perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very much he was her
inferior in talent, and all the elegancies of mind. But they live very comfortably. But of all the views which his garden, or which
the country or the kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with
the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that
bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house. [Illustration:

     “The first pleasing earnest of their welcome”
]




CHAPTER XLVII. Will you tell me
how long you have loved him?”

“It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began;
but I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds
at Pemberley.”

Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the
desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of
attachment. “It would be a crowd—a sad crowd; and what could be
worse than dancing without space to turn in?”

“Very true,” he gravely replied; “it was very bad.” But still he went
on measuring, and still he ended with,

“I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple.”

“No, no,” said she, “you are quite unreasonable. Elton.—She looked round for a moment;
he had joined Mr. A thousand vexatious thoughts
would recur. Better accommodations, he can promise them, and not a less
grateful welcome than at Randalls. They had not been long together before Darcy told her that Bingley was
also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her
satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley’s quick step
was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. I expected
you to stay two months. They will have their barouche-landau, of course, which holds
four perfectly; and therefore, without saying any thing of _our_
carriage, we should be able to explore the different beauties extremely
well. Her fears and her difficulties were
immediately before him. Jennings had attributed to a very different
cause; but whatever minor feelings less pure, less pleasing, might have
a share in that emotion, her esteem for the general benevolence, and
her gratitude for the particular friendship, which together prompted
Colonel Brandon to this act, were strongly felt, and warmly expressed. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most
remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself
agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than
in Charlotte’s, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence. If I may so express it, he has a _right_
to be proud.”

“That is very true,” replied Elizabeth, “and I could easily forgive
_his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_.”

“Pride,” observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her
reflections, “is a very common failing, I believe. “I am so glad we are got acquainted at last,” continued Charlotte.—“And
now I hope we shall always be great friends. Dixon, I mean—I do not know
that she ever heard about it from any body else; but it was very
natural, you know, that he should like to speak of his own place while
he was paying his addresses—and as Jane used to be very often walking
out with them—for Colonel and Mrs. They will
come and stand by my chair, and say, ‘Grandpapa, can you give me a bit
of string?’ and once Henry asked me for a knife, but I told him knives
were only made for grandpapas. Her pardon was duly begged at the close of the song, and
every thing usual followed. It was agreed to. Elinor now began to make the tea, and
Marianne was obliged to appear again. what could she mean by
it? After these came a second set; among the most come-at-able of whom were
Mrs. It
would be an interesting, and certainly a very kind undertaking; highly
becoming her own situation in life, her leisure, and powers. The
consequence was, that Elinor set out by herself to pay a visit, for
which no one could really have less inclination, and to run the risk of
a tête-à-tête with a woman, whom neither of the others had so much
reason to dislike. I do congratulate you, Mrs. He gave her a letter, it was from Frank, and to herself; he
had met with it in his way, and had taken the liberty of opening it. Weston, is it? Had it been allowable entertainment, had there been no pain to her
friend, or reproach to herself, in the waverings of Harriet’s mind,
Emma would have been amused by its variations. dear! But you have not explained to me the
particular reason of your coming now, nor how you heard of her
illness.”

“Last night, in Drury Lane lobby, I ran against Sir John Middleton, and
when he saw who I was, for the first time these two months, he spoke to
me. I am
sure Miss Fairfax must have found the evening pleasant, Emma. When Mr. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture
they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two
that they now saw Mr. Bennet’s being quite
unable to sit alone. At present I am not in love with
Mr. He would have had a wife of whose temper he could
make no complaint, but he would have been always necessitous—always
poor; and probably would soon have learned to rank the innumerable
comforts of a clear estate and good income as of far more importance,
even to domestic happiness, than the mere temper of a wife.”

“I have not a doubt of it,” said Marianne; “and I have nothing to
regret—nothing but my own folly.”

“Rather say your mother’s imprudence, my child,” said Mrs. you are too scrupulous, indeed you are,” cried Emma warmly, and
taking her hand. Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all the
reasonings and soothings and attentions of every kind that Emma could
give. Elton’s party! Do not
be impatient, Emma; it will all come out too soon.”

“Break it to me,” cried Emma, standing still with terror.—“Good
God!—Mr. The
hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised;
and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Some people are surprized, I believe, that
the eldest was not, but Isabella would have him called Henry, which I
thought very pretty of her. We invalids think we are privileged people.”

“My dear sir, do not make a stranger of me.”

“I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter. He had met her before breakfast as he was returning from a
walk with his little boys, when it had been just beginning to rain. “Certainly not.”

“I am sorry for that,” returned the other, while her eyes brightened at
the information, “it would have gave me such pleasure to meet you
there! Going in dismal weather, to return probably in worse;—four horses and
four servants taken out for nothing but to convey five idle, shivering
creatures into colder rooms and worse company than they might have had
at home.”

Emma did not find herself equal to give the pleased assent, which no
doubt he was in the habit of receiving, to emulate the “Very true, my
love,” which must have been usually administered by his travelling
companion; but she had resolution enough to refrain from making any
answer at all. Collins might never make the offer, and,
till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him. And why
does he regret it?—Because he finds it has not answered towards
himself. To that point went every leisure moment which her father’s
claims on her allowed, and every moment of involuntary absence of mind. Collins were once silent. Jane’s is nothing to it--nothing at all. In a
few minutes, Mrs. Smallridge’s at the time
proposed. Her Ladyship seemed pleased
with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to
offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to
ladies. Hurst and Miss
Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who
continued, though slowly, to mend; and, in the evening, Elizabeth joined
their party in the drawing-room. He was afraid of catching cold I dare say, and invented this
trick for getting out of it. Elizabeth was pleased to find that he had not betrayed the interference
of his friend; for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving
heart in the world, she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice
her against him. All the minor arrangements of table and
chair, lights and music, tea and supper, made themselves; or were left
as mere trifles to be settled at any time between Mrs. what is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling than
politeness; then recollecting himself, “I will not detain you a minute;
but let me, or let the servant, go after Mr. How little did you
tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! Elton. Ferrars should seem to like me, if she did
not, and her liking me is every thing. He saw her concern, and coming to her, took
her hand, pressed it, and kissed it with grateful respect. Weston was sorry for such a charge. Lord bless me! She is pretty, and she is good
tempered, and that is all. She attracted him more than he liked; and Miss
Bingley was uncivil to _her_ and more teasing than usual to himself. He did look at it, and into it, for half an
hour; was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied
with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately. They were to go immediately to
Delaford, that Edward might have some personal knowledge of his future
home, and assist his patron and friend in deciding on what improvements
were needed to it; and from thence, after staying there a couple of
nights, he was to proceed on his journey to town. Darcy
could not have. Dr. Darcy. For shame, Willoughby, can
you wait for an invitation here?”

His colour increased; and with his eyes fixed on the ground he only
replied, “You are too good.”

Mrs. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the
taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the
occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the man
about them, that he advanced but little. Had he begun as he ought, there
would have been no difficulty now.”

“We shall never agree about him,” cried Emma; “but that is nothing
extraordinary. There--I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it;
and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly
reasonable. and Mrs. He
appeared to have a very open temper—certainly a very cheerful and
lively one; she could observe nothing wrong in his notions, a great
deal decidedly right; he spoke of his uncle with warm regard, was fond
of talking of him—said he would be the best man in the world if he were
left to himself; and though there was no being attached to the aunt, he
acknowledged her kindness with gratitude, and seemed to mean always to
speak of her with respect. Weston must not speak of it again. Another room of much better size might be secured for the
purpose; but it was at the other end of the house, and a long awkward
passage must be gone through to get at it. Jennings, but he is old enough to be
_my_ father; and if he were ever animated enough to be in love, must
have long outlived every sensation of the kind. Bennet thus began the projected
conversation:--

“Oh, Mr. I think it is the
state of mind which gives most spirit and delight. I can hardly imagine the young man whom I
saw talking with you the other day could express himself so well, if
left quite to his own powers, and yet it is not the style of a woman;
no, certainly, it is too strong and concise; not diffuse enough for a
woman. how shall I bear so much happiness?”

She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the
card-party, and was sitting upstairs with Kitty. He might be able to join them in the
evening, but certainly not to dinner. They were rapidly forming words
for each other, or for any body else who would be puzzled. I meant only
myself. Many stared--many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Mr. Fortunately for her, they had now reached the cottage, and the
conversation could be continued no farther. Cannot you imagine, Mr. Weston and
Emma tried earnestly to cheer him and turn his attention from his
son-in-law, who was pursuing his triumph rather unfeelingly. She paused over it,
while Harriet stood anxiously watching for her opinion, with a “Well,
well,” and was at last forced to add, “Is it a good letter? Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward’s name, which does not
surprise us; but, to our great astonishment, not a line has been
received from him on the occasion. I was almost afraid you would be hurrying home.”

He contrived that she should be seated by him; and was sufficiently
employed in looking out the best baked apple for her, and trying to
make her help or advise him in his work, till Jane Fairfax was quite
ready to sit down to the pianoforte again. If he had never esteemed my opinion before, he
would have thought highly of me then; and, I dare say, left the house
thinking me the best friend and counsellor man ever had. Knightley. Had not Elinor, in
the sad countenance of her sister, seen a check to all mirth, she could
have been entertained by Mrs. and his sisters are charming women. Sincerely wish you happy in your choice, and it shall not be my
    fault if we are not always good friends, as our near relationship
    now makes proper. that is quite—I suppose there never was a piece of news more
generally interesting. But be
it sweetness or be it stupidity in her—quickness of friendship, or
dulness of feeling—there was one person, I think, who must have felt
it: Miss Fairfax herself. Before the end of September, Emma attended Harriet to church, and saw
her hand bestowed on Robert Martin with so complete a satisfaction, as
no remembrances, even connected with Mr. Indeed he has no improper pride. And now, after only ten minutes notice—Gone too without
intending to return!—Something more than what he owned to us must have
happened. Elton to Mr. Come, my dear Emma,
let us be friends, and say no more about it. Elinor was hardly
less anxious than herself for their removal, and only so much less bent
on its being effected immediately, as that she was conscious of the
difficulties of so long a journey, which Marianne could not be brought
to acknowledge. You
will excuse me. They
should lose her; and, probably, in great measure, her husband
also.—Frank Churchill would return among them no more; and Miss
Fairfax, it was reasonable to suppose, would soon cease to belong to
Highbury. Wingfield told me that he has never known them more
general or heavy—except when it has been quite an influenza.”

“That has been a good deal the case, my dear; but not to the degree you
mention. The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing
on the steps of the house, as they entered the paddock; and when the
carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their
faces and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of
capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome. “I do not know,” said he, after a pause of expectation on her side, and
thoughtfulness on his own, “how _you_ may have accounted for my
behaviour to your sister, or what diabolical motive you may have
imputed to me. How little did I then think that the very first news
I should hear from Mrs. How nicely you talk; I love to hear you. For their brother’s sake, too, for the sake of his own
heart, she rejoiced; and she reproached herself for being unjust to his
merit before, in believing him incapable of generosity. Mrs. We cannot mean the same Mr. You will not be fit to be seen when you get
there.”

“I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.”

“Is this a hint to me, Lizzy,” said her father, “to send for the
horses?”

“No, indeed. On the contrary, if I have felt any anxiety at all on the
subject, it has been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want of
pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation, when I talked of his
coming to Barton. Frank Churchill had behaved
very ill by herself—very ill in many ways,—but it was not so much _his_
behaviour as her _own_, which made her so angry with him. [Illustration:

“At Church”
]




CHAPTER XXXI. “How surprised you will be, Willoughby, on receiving this; and I think
you will feel something more than surprise, when you know that I am in
town. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that I
will ever recede. I do look forward to it, I own, with
_very_ great pleasure.”

It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax therefore that he would have
preferred the society of William Larkins. Her daughter enjoyed a most uncommon degree
of popularity for a woman neither young, handsome, rich, nor married. Besides, she is out of health
now; but _that_ indeed, by her own account, she has always been. Elton, whether the uncertainty of our meetings, the
sort of constant expectation there will be of his coming in to-day or
to-morrow, and at any hour, may not be more friendly to happiness than
having him actually in the house. “I was simple enough to think, that because my _faith_ was plighted to
another, there could be no danger in my being with you; and that the
consciousness of my engagement was to keep my heart as safe and sacred
as my honour. She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she
made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the
neighbourhood, nor to his leaving his parish occasionally for a week or
two to visit his relations. Our
instrument is a capital one, probably superior to ---- you shall try it
some day. She would be very glad to stay.”

There was no recovering Miss Taylor—nor much likelihood of ceasing to
pity her; but a few weeks brought some alleviation to Mr. “Very well; that reply will do for the present. Gardiner did not write again, till he had received an answer from
Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send. A situation such as you
deserve, and your friends would require for you, is no everyday
occurrence, is not obtained at a moment’s notice; indeed, indeed, we
must begin inquiring directly.”

“Excuse me, ma’am, but this is by no means my intention; I make no
inquiry myself, and should be sorry to have any made by my friends. Bennet before breakfast, a
conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally
to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress for it might be found at
Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general
encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. Highbury, that airy, cheerful, happy-looking Highbury,
would be his constant attraction.”—Highbury, with Mrs. Bennet’s manor. But, on second thoughts, perhaps
Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living better than any
other person.”

Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference for
her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any
information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get
over it immediately. On his quitting the room, she sat down, unable to support herself, and
looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her,
or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,
“Let me call your maid. And so I am not to be surprized that Jane Fairfax accepts her
civilities and consents to be with her. Though our kind
uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten
thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury, and a lively
curiosity to see him prevailed, though the compliment was so little
returned that he had never been there in his life. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not
return it. Wickham” by
each of them; and in the meantime she went after dinner to show her ring
and boast of being married to Mrs. “Upon my word,” said Mrs. Mr. His extreme attention to my mother—wanting her
to sit in the vicarage pew, that she might hear the better, for my
mother is a little deaf, you know—it is not much, but she does not hear
quite quick. Every disposition of the ground was
good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered
on its banks, and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace
it, with delight. I never wish to
offend, but I am so foolishly shy, that I often seem negligent, when I
am only kept back by my natural awkwardness. Dear Miss Woodhouse, how could you so mistake me?”
turning away distressed. Mr. It will not be so great a loss of time: but if you dislike it—”

“Not at all. “You may well warn me against such an evil. Woodhouse than to Emma. As for my fair cousins,
though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall
now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting
my cousin Elizabeth.”

With proper civilities, the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally
surprised to find that he meditated a quick return. But when you mentioned Mrs. Let us hope for
better things. Choose properly, choose a
gentlewoman for _my_ sake, and for your _own_; let her be an active,
useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small
income go a good way. They was stopping in a chaise at the door of
the New London Inn, as I went there with a message from Sally at the
Park to her brother, who is one of the post-boys. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Why does not he try Bath?—Indeed he
should. He is the very best young
man—But, my dear Jane, if you remember, I told you yesterday he was
precisely the height of Mr. Such a change! There
can be no occasion for your going so soon. He has those to please who must be pleased, and who (between
ourselves) are sometimes to be pleased only by a good many sacrifices. has he written to you?”

“I have known it these four months. Here was knowledge in
which no one could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than
a perfect understanding between the parties could justify her in
throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery. Martin’s saying, all of a sudden, that she thought Miss Smith was
grown, had brought on a more interesting subject, and a warmer manner. They are not married,
     nor can I find there was any intention of being so; but if you are
     willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on
     your side, I hope it will not be long before they are. They saw him
step into his carriage, and in a minute it was out of sight. Elton coolly; “but their going to
Bath was quite out of the question; and she was not perfectly convinced
that the place might suit her better than her father.” And then, to
prevent farther outrage and indignation, changed the subject directly. He wished him at the devil with all his heart. In spite of her vexation, she could not help feeling it almost
ridiculous, that she should have the very same distressing and delicate
office to perform by Harriet, which Mrs. Emma assisted with her invention, memory and taste; and as
Harriet wrote a very pretty hand, it was likely to be an arrangement of
the first order, in form as well as quantity. Collins’s scruples of leaving Mr. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of
their intention. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty; but she smiled too
much. there is not a bit of fish to be got
to-day. Jennings, who, having heard of the arrival of a gentleman at the
cottage, came to take a survey of the guest. My dear Emma, suppose we all
have a little gruel.”

Emma could not suppose any such thing, knowing as she did, that both
the Mr. CHAPTER XII


Mr. Elton, on his return, made his own indifference as evident and
indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do, she could not
imagine Harriet’s persisting to place her happiness in the sight or the
recollection of him. She need not trouble herself to pity him. Darcy mean,” said she to Charlotte, “by listening to my
conversation with Colonel Forster?”

“That is a question which Mr. Darcy’s contempt seemed
abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech; and at the
end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way: Mr. Bennet sat looking and winking at
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any
impression on them. It
was a right thing to do. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as
possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your
life.”

“You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. She is not a sensible girl, nor a
girl of any information. A Miss Hawkins—that’s all I
know. Jane was anxious that no
difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded
that she talked as much as ever; but her mind was so busily engaged,
that she did not always know when she was silent. It was not very long, though rather longer than Mr. Let us be discreet—quite on our good behaviour.—Hush!—You
remember those lines—I forget the poem at this moment:

“For when a lady’s in the case,
“You know all other things give place.”


Now I say, my dear, in _our_ case, for _lady_, read——mum! Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dance in her life, as she was
that evening, and never so much fatigued by the exercise. But it was not immediately that an opportunity of doing so could be
commanded, though Lucy was as well disposed as herself to take
advantage of any that occurred; for the weather was not often fine
enough to allow of their joining in a walk, where they might most
easily separate themselves from the others; and though they met at
least every other evening either at the park or cottage, and chiefly at
the former, they could not be supposed to meet for the sake of
conversation. Frank Churchill done, to make you
suppose him such an unnatural creature?”

“I am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature, in suspecting
that he may have learnt to be above his connexions, and to care very
little for any thing but his own pleasure, from living with those who
have always set him the example of it. It adds even another motive. He
had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring his
wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was
paid she had no knowledge of it. Now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr. Elinor has not my feelings, and therefore she
may overlook it, and be happy with him. He must write his own sermons; and the time
that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care
and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making
as comfortable as possible. Darcy, a most
intimate, confidential friend. If the violence
of her passions, the weakness of her understanding—I do not mean,
however, to defend myself. no, it is a meeting at the Crown, a regular meeting. Knightley felt as strongly as herself; but the
inadmissibility of any other change, he could not agree to. It will be quite delightful!—My love,” applying to her husband, “don’t
you long to have the Miss Dashwoods come to Cleveland?”

“Certainly,” he replied, with a sneer—“I came into Devonshire with no
other view.”

“There now,”—said his lady, “you see Mr. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely
they should have opposed their brother’s. Allowing the case, however, to
stand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet,
that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and
the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering
one argument in favour of its propriety.”

“To yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no merit
with you.”

“To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of
either.”

“You appear to me, Mr. Willoughby however is the only person who can have a right to show
that house; and as he went in an open carriage, it was impossible to
have any other companion. “Here is
his answer, if you like to see it.”

It was the answer to the communication of his intended marriage. Knightley think or say what he would, she had done nothing which
woman’s friendship and woman’s feelings would not justify. She was very fond of singing. “You could not have visited me!” she cried, looking aghast. She was
going to the butcher’s, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on
Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed.”

Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing
colour. I cannot be so sanguine as
Mr. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give
implicit confidence to all his assertions; for, as to Mr. Your friend, Miss Marianne, too—which you
will not be sorry to hear. Woodhouse, of whose friendly civilities he should ever
retain a grateful sense—and had Mr. Fortune I do not want; employment I do not want;
consequence I do not want: I believe few married women are half as much
mistress of their husband’s house as I am of Hartfield; and never,
never could I expect to be so truly beloved and important; so always
first and always right in any man’s eyes as I am in my father’s.”

“But then, to be an old maid at last, like Miss Bates!”

“That is as formidable an image as you could present, Harriet; and if I
thought I should ever be like Miss Bates! The morning that we parted too! Emma could not think
it too soon; for with all his good and agreeable qualities, there was a
sort of parade in his speeches which was very apt to incline her to
laugh. “Oh! Weston did think of it, she was very strongly persuaded; and though not
meaning to be induced by him, or by any body else, to give up a
situation which she believed more replete with good than any she could
change it for, she had a great curiosity to see him, a decided
intention of finding him pleasant, of being liked by him to a certain
degree, and a sort of pleasure in the idea of their being coupled in
their friends’ imaginations. Oh, Elinor, how incomprehensible are your feelings! It was her own universal
good-will and contented temper which worked such wonders. She felt it at her heart. Selina has entirely given up music—never
touches the instrument—though she played sweetly. I want to puzzle you again.”

Emma was pleased with the thought; and producing the box, the table was
quickly scattered over with alphabets, which no one seemed so much
disposed to employ as their two selves. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Knightley’s, whose fond
praise of her gave the subject even a kind of welcome; and he was soon
used to be talked to by each, on every fair occasion.—They had all the
assistance which Isabella could give, by letters of the strongest
approbation; and Mrs. Such a woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his
intruding on Miss Bennet, and, after sitting a few minutes longer,
without saying much to anybody, went away. A single man of large fortune; four or
five thousand a year. He knows nothing of it; do
tell him, my dear.”

He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to hers, and, with a look
which perfectly assured her of his good information, inquired after her
sister. Wickham
and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has
taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone
to Scotland. But so little interest had he taken in the matter, that he owed
all his knowledge of the house, garden, and glebe, extent of the
parish, condition of the land, and rate of the tithes, to Elinor
herself, who had heard so much of it from Colonel Brandon, and heard it
with so much attention, as to be entirely mistress of the subject. But thirty-five has nothing to do with matrimony.”

“Perhaps,” said Elinor, “thirty-five and seventeen had better not have
any thing to do with matrimony together. Jane Fairfax mistress of the
Abbey!—Oh! “You are better placed _here_; very fit for a
wife, but not at all for a governess. They could describe an entertainment
with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their
acquaintance with spirit. Hurst and
Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt
for it. Wingfield thinks the vicinity of
Brunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as to air.”

“Ah! The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feeling. Come, come, this won’t do, Colonel; so let us hear
the truth of it.”

“My dear madam,” said Lady Middleton, “recollect what you are saying.”

“Perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin Fanny is married?” said
Mrs. _I_ write to
the Doctor, indeed!’”

“Well,” said Elinor, “it is a comfort to be prepared against the worst. If you think he
will come, I shall think so too; for you know Enscombe.”

“Yes—I have some right to that knowledge; though I have never been at
the place in my life.—She is an odd woman!—But I never allow myself to
speak ill of her, on Frank’s account; for I do believe her to be very
fond of him. Colonel Campbell is a very agreeable man, and Mrs. CHAPTER XVII


When the ladies returned to the drawing-room after dinner, Emma found
it hardly possible to prevent their making two distinct parties;—with
so much perseverance in judging and behaving ill did Mrs. Vanity, extravagance, love of change,
restlessness of temper, which must be doing something, good or bad;
heedlessness as to the pleasure of his father and Mrs. It gave to his intentions whatever of
decision was wanting before; and he finally resolved, that it would be
absolutely unnecessary, if not highly indecorous, to do more for the
widow and children of his father, than such kind of neighbourly acts as
his own wife pointed out. “Is Miss Woodhouse sure that she would like to hear what we are all
thinking of?”

“Oh! Hurst.”

Her sister made not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was
opened; and Darcy, after a few moments’ recollection, was not sorry for
it. With this treatment, Mr. Weston and
Cole will be there too; but one is apt to speak only of those who
lead.—I fancy Mr. There was a communication
before her, one which _she_ only could be competent to make—the
confession of her engagement to her father; but she would have nothing
to do with it at present.—She had resolved to defer the disclosure till
Mrs. I
advise every body who is going to build, to build a cottage. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us
all. She spent
whole hours at the pianoforte alternately singing and crying; her voice
often totally suspended by her tears. Bingley’s regard; and yet it was not in her nature to question the
veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. This is great news, indeed. It is too long ago. After tea, Mr. To work in his garden was one of his most
respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance
with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and
owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Elizabeth, construing all
this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased; and
on this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their
visitors left them, capable of considering the last half hour with some
satisfaction, though while it was passing the enjoyment of it had been
little. He now wished it more than ever. My
feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. He addressed
himself directly to Miss Bennet with a polite congratulation; Mr. To know that _she_ thought his coming certain
was enough to make Emma consider it so, and sincerely did she rejoice
in their joy. It is the greatest
absurdity—Actually snowing at this moment!—The folly of not allowing
people to be comfortable at home—and the folly of people’s not staying
comfortably at home when they can! Her affection must have overpowered her
judgment.”

“Yes, I have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him.”

“I am afraid,” returned Emma, sighing, “that I must often have
contributed to make her unhappy.”

“On your side, my love, it was very innocently done. She had not been many hours at home, before she found that the Brighton
scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under
frequent discussion between her parents. Marianne, I dare say,
will not leave her room again this evening. He has had great faults, faults of
inconsideration and thoughtlessness; and I am very much of his opinion
in thinking him likely to be happier than he deserves: but still as he
is, beyond a doubt, really attached to Miss Fairfax, and will soon, it
may be hoped, have the advantage of being constantly with her, I am
very ready to believe his character will improve, and acquire from hers
the steadiness and delicacy of principle that it wants. “I think her
all you describe. If you remember any queernesses, set them all to the right account.—Of
the pianoforte so much talked of, I feel it only necessary to say, that
its being ordered was absolutely unknown to Miss F—, who would never
have allowed me to send it, had any choice been given her.—The delicacy
of her mind throughout the whole engagement, my dear madam, is much
beyond my power of doing justice to. You are lucky in
having such a master.”

“Yes, sir, I know I am. when he was speaking of my future home,
and expressing his fears lest the retirement of it should be
disagreeable; and the inferiority of the house too—knowing what I had
been accustomed to—of course he was not wholly without apprehension. I am very much
mistaken if your sex in general would not think such beauty, and such
temper, the highest claims a woman could possess.”

“Upon my word, Emma, to hear you abusing the reason you have, is almost
enough to make me think so too. Certainly I had been accustomed
to every luxury at Maple Grove; but I did assure him that two carriages
were not necessary to my happiness, nor were spacious apartments. Dixon in
them.”

“Mr. What brother on earth would do half so much
for his sisters, even if _really_ his sisters! Weston meanwhile, perfectly unsuspicious of the indignation he was
exciting, happy and cheerful as usual, and with all the right of being
principal talker, which a day spent anywhere from home confers, was
making himself agreeable among the rest; and having satisfied the
inquiries of his wife as to his dinner, convincing her that none of all
her careful directions to the servants had been forgotten, and spread
abroad what public news he had heard, was proceeding to a family
communication, which, though principally addressed to Mrs. Willoughby’s
marriage with Miss Grey. We must have Mrs. Knightley, am equally stout in my confidence of its not
doing them any harm. You could not have gratified me more than by
expressing an interest—. It was impossible to imagine; it was
impossible not to long to know. She was sure of Mrs. Dashwood, whose terror as they drew near the house had produced
almost the conviction of Marianne’s being no more, had no voice to
inquire after her, no voice even for Elinor; but _she_, waiting neither
for salutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief; and her
mother, catching it with all her usual warmth, was in a moment as much
overcome by her happiness, as she had been before by her fears. I hope it is a dry
situation, and that her health will be taken good care of. When breakfast was over, they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth
began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and
solicitude they showed for Jane. Her father fondly replied, “Ah! Weston and hear the instrument.”

“Well—if you advise it.—But (with a smile) if Colonel Campbell should
have employed a careless friend, and if it should prove to have an
indifferent tone—what shall I say? After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
variety of thought, reconsidering events, determining probabilities, and
reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so
important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at
length return home; and she entered the house with the wish of appearing
cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such reflections as
must make her unfit for conversation. She was
previously disposed, I believe, to doubt the morality of my conduct in
general, and was moreover discontented with the very little attention,
the very little portion of my time that I had bestowed on her, in my
present visit. here comes your
beau, Nancy,’ my cousin said t’other day, when she saw him crossing the
street to the house. Mr. Indeed, you are doing a very unkind thing in spreading the report, and
you will find that you have though you will not believe me now.”

Mrs. We were always encouraged to
read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Lydia’s going to Brighton was all that consoled her for the
melancholy conviction of her husband’s never intending to go there
himself. It must not be: and yet the danger of a renewal of the
acquaintance—! She knew a family near Maple Grove who had
tried it, and been obliged to separate before the end of the first
quarter. and Mrs. The longer she considered it, the greater was her sense of
its expediency. At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind
roused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself. His spirits required support. From his garden, Mr. And I hope she is well.”

“Whom do you mean, ma’am?” said he, colouring a little. On being informed of the invitation, Mrs. They were of a respectable family in
the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their
memories than that their brother’s fortune and their own had been
acquired by trade. My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,
    Lords of the earth! Her disposition and abilities were
equally worthy of all that friendship could do; and at eighteen or
nineteen she was, as far as such an early age can be qualified for the
care of children, fully competent to the office of instruction herself;
but she was too much beloved to be parted with. This son was to join
in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow
and younger children would by that means be provided for. Ferrars—“very pretty,”—and without regarding them at
all, returned them to her daughter. Nobody but yourself could imagine such a thing
possible. Woodhouse
could only give a submissive sigh; and as Emma saw his spirits affected
by the idea of his daughter’s attachment to her husband, she
immediately led to such a branch of the subject as must raise them. I am not indebted for my present happiness to
your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. Why they should not
openly acknowledge to her mother and herself, what their constant
behaviour to each other declared to have taken place, Elinor could not
imagine. Knightley; so far it was all of
course—and it was hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must
be asked to make the eighth:—but this invitation was not given with
equal satisfaction, and on many accounts Emma was particularly pleased
by Harriet’s begging to be allowed to decline it. Know your own happiness. Some are gone to
the ponds, and some to the lime walk. He was received by Mrs. You can’t think how much I go through in my
mind from it altogether. But you really do admit the justice of what I
have said in his defence?—I am happy—and he is acquitted.”

“Not entirely. She was a little shocked at the want of two drawing rooms, at
the poor attempt at rout-cakes, and there being no ice in the Highbury
card-parties. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to
complain of it as her husband. I always preferred the
church, as I still do. By ten o’clock the whole party was assembled at the park, where they
were to breakfast. But I am at his disposal. But Sir John would not be satisfied—the carriage
should be sent for them and they must come. He will be here this evening, I dare
say, and then I will give it him back, and some nonsense or other will
pass between us, and you shall not be committed.—Your soft eyes shall
chuse their own time for beaming. Churchill, nobody would think of
opening the windows at Randalls. Wingfield told me, that he did not believe he had ever
sent us off altogether, in such good case. It had been settled in the evening, between the aunt and niece, that
such a striking civility as Miss Darcy’s, in coming to them on the very
day of her arrival at Pemberley--for she had reached it only to a late
breakfast--ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by
some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it
would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following
morning. I do not know whether I ever before mentioned to
you my feelings on this subject, but I will not leave the country
without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them
unreasonable. She saw her in idea settled in that
very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could
bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring
even to like Bingley’s two sisters. Well, how pleased I am! They proceed
from no misconduct, and can bring no disgrace. It was hot; and after walking some time over the gardens in a
scattered, dispersed way, scarcely any three together, they insensibly
followed one another to the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of
limes, which stretching beyond the garden at an equal distance from the
river, seemed the finish of the pleasure grounds.—It led to nothing;
nothing but a view at the end over a low stone wall with high pillars,
which seemed intended, in their erection, to give the appearance of an
approach to the house, which never had been there. Frank was standing by her, but not steadily; there was a restlessness,
which shewed a mind not at ease. She was more alive to the disgrace, which her want of new
clothes must reflect on her daughter’s nuptials, than to any sense of
shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they
took place. He seemed to have all the life and spirit,
cheerful feelings, and social inclinations of his father, and nothing
of the pride or reserve of Enscombe. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be
attended to.”

Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey;
and as she did not answer them all herself attention was
necessary--which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a
mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. I never met with anybody who delighted me
so much. A house in town! Palmer; and as it
gave her likewise no concern, she never mentioned her name. But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his
character; for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the next
morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw
himself at her feet. But can we wonder that,
with such a husband to provoke inconstancy, and without a friend to
advise or restrain her (for my father lived only a few months after
their marriage, and I was with my regiment in the East Indies) she
should fall? His belief of her sister’s
insensibility she instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the
real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any
wish of doing him justice. Jennings’s united request in return, Mrs. My mother too! Mrs. Forster. Bennet was dead. She is very timid and silent. Dashwood was acting on motives of policy as well as pleasure
in the frequency of her visits at Delaford; for her wish of bringing
Marianne and Colonel Brandon together was hardly less earnest, though
rather more liberal than what John had expressed. Darcy! Her Ladyship, with great
condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Conceal the unhappy truth as
long as it is possible. What
answer did you give him?—Did you allow him to hope?”

“Oh! The whole story would have
been speedily formed under her active imagination; and every thing
established in the most melancholy order of disastrous love. She was pleased with the
eagerness to arrive which had made him alter his plan, and travel
earlier, later, and quicker, that he might gain half a day. Elinor remembered what Robert had told her in Harley Street, of his
opinion of what his own mediation in his brother’s affairs might have
done, if applied to in time. You and I must positively exert our
authority.”

“My advice,” said Mrs. John Knightley smiled, and replied,

“That is to say, you chose to have your walk, for you were not six
yards from your own door when I had the pleasure of meeting you; and
Henry and John had seen more drops than they could count long before. Well, my comfort is, I am sure
Jane will die of a broken heart, and then he will be sorry for what he
has done.”

But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation she
made no answer. Oh! With Mr. I am sorry to say it of
them, but so it is. A poet in love must be encouraged in both capacities,
or neither. Would either of them only have given her a full and minute
account of the whole affair between Marianne and Mr. Thank ye, the gloves do very well—only a
little too large about the wrist; but Jane is taking them in.”

“What was I talking of?” said she, beginning again when they were all
in the street. It was settled so, upon
the hill, while we were walking about with Mr. You may depend upon my seeking no further.”

“Oh, certainly,” said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; “we will
ask you no questions.”

“Thank you,” said Lydia; “for if you did, I should certainly tell you
all, and then Wickham would be so angry.”

On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her
power, by running away. Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting
the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. Miss Darcy looked as if she
wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a
short sentence, when there was least danger of its being heard. Elton, and Miss Hawkins!—Good
morning to you.”

Emma, alone with her father, had half her attention wanted by him while
he lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry—and to
marry strangers too—and the other half she could give to her own view
of the subject. Perry, whose name, I dare say, is not unknown to you,
does not conceive it would be at all more likely to be useful now.”

“Ah! Upon this signal, the youngest of
her daughters put herself forward. Bennet: she would have been
glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage
him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it,
and could not help saying so. She thinks nobody equal to him.”

“And I assure you, Mr. But we are none
of us consistent; and in his behaviour to me there were stronger
impulses even than pride.”

“Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?”

“Yes; it has often led him to be liberal and generous; to give his money
freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the
poor. Jennings told me,” said he, “that you wished to speak with me, at
least I understood her so—or I certainly should not have intruded on
you in such a manner; though at the same time, I should have been
extremely sorry to leave London without seeing you and your sister;
especially as it will most likely be some time—it is not probable that
I should soon have the pleasure of meeting you again. Mr. Her astonishment, however, was
extreme; and continually was she repeating, “Why is he so altered? Elton, I am
obliged to any body who feels for me, but I am quite serious in wishing
nothing to be done till the summer. She was not yet quite able
to see him and his charming happy wife together, without feeling
uncomfortable. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many
expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere. She would rather
busy herself about any thing than speak. Miss Woodhouse, must
you be going?—You seem but just come—so very obliging of you.”

Emma found it really time to be at home; the visit had already lasted
long; and on examining watches, so much of the morning was perceived to
be gone, that Mrs. Elton’s time is so engaged.”

“Upon my word it is, Miss Bates.—He really is engaged from morning to
night.—There is no end of people’s coming to him, on some pretence or
other.—The magistrates, and overseers, and churchwardens, are always
wanting his opinion. and Emma received a smile which seemed to say, “These
are my own concerns. I bring a new proposal on the subject:—a
thought of my father’s, which waits only your approbation to be acted
upon. Poor
Brandon! Bennet’s expectations were fully answered. Had both the children been there, the affair might have been determined
too easily by measuring them at once; but as Harry only was present, it
was all conjectural assertion on both sides; and every body had a right
to be equally positive in their opinion, and to repeat it over and over
again as often as they liked. [Illustration: “Walked back with them”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came
from Netherfield, and was opened immediately. Every possibility of
good was before me, and the first of blessings secured, in obtaining
her promises of faith and correspondence. Bennet,” as she entered the room, “we have had a most
delightful evening, a most excellent ball. They continued together with unabated regard however, till
the marriage of Miss Campbell, who by that chance, that luck which so
often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs, giving attraction to
what is moderate rather than to what is superior, engaged the
affections of Mr. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. “At last we are alone. Perry’s decided
opinion, in favour of such exercise for his patient. I see the imprudence
of it. We have tried two or three subjects already without success,
and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”

“What think you of books?” said he, smiling. It was not Lucy’s business to put herself forward, and the
appearance of secrecy must still be kept up. Isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor as could be
expected; on her first arrival she had thought her out of spirits,
which appeared perfectly natural, as there was a dentist to be
consulted; but, since that business had been over, she did not appear
to find Harriet different from what she had known her before.—Isabella,
to be sure, was no very quick observer; yet if Harriet had not been
equal to playing with the children, it would not have escaped her. Yes, I see what she means, (turning to Mr. “Yes, she called yesterday with her father. But,
however, we may have it all over in the evening; for we shall be quite
alone. Bennet made no answer; and each of them, deep in thought, continued
silent till they reached the house. Elton speak with more unreserve than she had ever
done, and Mr. A few moments’ reflection, however, produced a
very happy idea, and she exclaimed;—

“Oh, ho!—I understand you. Woodhouse was soon ready for his tea; and when he had drank his tea
he was quite ready to go home; and it was as much as his three
companions could do, to entertain away his notice of the lateness of
the hour, before the other gentlemen appeared. However, I am much happier as I am. “_I_ had
none. The
loss of the ball—the loss of the young man—and all that the young man
might be feeling!—It was too wretched!—Such a delightful evening as it
would have been!—Every body so happy! “It was my father’s last request to me,” replied her husband, “that I
should assist his widow and daughters.”

“He did not know what he was talking of, I dare say; ten to one but he
was light-headed at the time. “Is it not clear enough? Well, I am glad she is gone to settle in Ireland.”

“You are right. He had been
thinking it over most deeply, most intently; he had at first hoped to
induce Mr. In general their evenings were less engaged with friends than their
mornings; but one complete dinner engagement, and out of the house too,
there was no avoiding, though at Christmas. Two of her
girls had been on the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing
in it. Mrs. [Illustration]

Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as
Elizabeth half expected Mr. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be
unpardonable in _me_.”

“Exceed their income! You have widely mistaken my
character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. “One more;—they would not
fatigue Miss Fairfax on any account, and would only ask for one more.”
And Frank Churchill was heard to say, “I think you could manage this
without effort; the first part is so very trifling. That is your date. Weston, with her baby on her knee, indulging in such reflections
as these, was one of the happiest women in the world. I see no advantage in
consulting Miss Bates.”

“But she is so amusing, so extremely amusing! A very little
trouble on your side secures him. Bennet; “but it is a comfort to think that, whatever of
that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will
always make the most of it.”

Mr. Mrs. How could you
suppose me ignorant? Elton’s engagement had been the cure of
the agitation of meeting Mr. As it was, it required but
a slight effort of fancy to connect his emotion with the tender
recollection of past regard. “Quite seasonable; and
extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it did not begin
yesterday, and prevent this day’s party, which it might very possibly
have done, for Mr. “Middling, my dear; I cannot compliment you. Jennings, it lasted a
considerable time, and they were just setting themselves, after it,
round the common working table, when a letter was delivered to
Marianne, which she eagerly caught from the servant, and, turning of a
death-like paleness, instantly ran out of the room. He really pressed them, with
some earnestness, to consider Norland as their home; and, as no plan
appeared so eligible to Mrs. Smith has
this morning exercised the privilege of riches upon a poor dependent
cousin, by sending me on business to London. You will allow me to bring Jane Fairfax?”

“I cannot name a day,” said he, “till I have spoken to some others whom
I would wish to meet you.”

“Oh! And in return for an
acknowledgment, which must give me some pain, you cannot deny me the
privilege of disliking him as much as ever.”




CHAPTER XI. Palmer took no notice of her. takes M. Perry had said so much—but, except
them, Jane would really see nobody.”

Emma did not want to be classed with the Mrs. Fortunately for those who pay their court through such foibles, a fond
mother, though, in pursuit of praise for her children, the most
rapacious of human beings, is likewise the most credulous; her demands
are exorbitant; but she will swallow any thing; and the excessive
affection and endurance of the Miss Steeles towards her offspring were
viewed therefore by Lady Middleton without the smallest surprise or
distrust. Mrs. He had returned to a late dinner, after
some days’ absence, and now walked up to Hartfield to say that all were
well in Brunswick Square. Weston was looking so ill, and had an air of so much perturbation,
that Emma’s uneasiness increased; and the moment they were alone, she
eagerly said,

“What is it my dear friend? The weather was remarkably fine, and she readily consented. To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused,
and whose merits she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive
information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted
for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an
interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just, as
what Jane felt for Bingley. “But how did he account for
it?”

“It must have been his sisters’ doing. It must be
Willoughby therefore whom you suspect. And then we were so merry all the way home! I
have not always known their writing apart.”

“Yes,” said his brother hesitatingly, “there is a likeness. Elton’s oddities, or of any thing else unpleasant, and enjoy all
that was enjoyable to the utmost. You showed me how insufficient were all my
pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.”

“Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?”

“Indeed I had. With great indignation did he continue to observe him; with great alarm
and distrust, to observe also his two blinded companions. And I must say, I think she was used very
hardly; for your sister scolded like any fury, and soon drove her into
a fainting fit. Where Miss Taylor failed to stimulate, I may safely
affirm that Harriet Smith will do nothing.—You never could persuade her
to read half so much as you wished.—You know you could not.”

“I dare say,” replied Mrs. What are men
to rocks and mountains? Not above ten miles, I dare say.”

“Much nearer thirty,” said her husband. Lord! By many significant looks and silent
entreaties did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of
complaisance,--but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an
opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. I think it admirable; and, as far as I can answer for
myself, shall be most happy—It seems the only improvement that could
be. I do not
care for myself. Had you
not been surrounded by other friends, I might have been tempted to
introduce a subject, to ask questions, to speak more openly than might
have been strictly correct.—I feel that I should certainly have been
impertinent.”

“Oh!” cried Jane, with a blush and an hesitation which Emma thought
infinitely more becoming to her than all the elegance of all her usual
composure—“there would have been no danger. so silly—so satisfied—so
smiling—so prosing—so undistinguishing and unfastidious—and so apt to
tell every thing relative to every body about me, I would marry
to-morrow. With all dear Emma’s little faults, she is an
excellent creature. He did
     not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly
     consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him
     till after the departure of the former. Darcy may hug himself.”

“Mr. My beau, indeed! As
a counsellor she was not wanted; but as an approver, (a much safer
character,) she was truly welcome. My right to
place myself in a situation requiring such concealment, is another
question. E., you have not been to
Donwell!—You mean the Crown; you come from the meeting at the Crown.”

“No, no, that’s to-morrow; and I particularly wanted to see Knightley
to-day on that very account.—Such a dreadful broiling morning!—I went
over the fields too—(speaking in a tone of great ill-usage,) which made
it so much the worse. Oh! She was seated in her mother’s lap, covered with kisses, her
wound bathed with lavender-water, by one of the Miss Steeles, who was
on her knees to attend her, and her mouth stuffed with sugar plums by
the other. Now, if your friends have any gratitude, they will say
something pretty loud about you and me in return; but I cannot stay to
hear it.”

“Oh! His
attachment to Rosings certainly increases.”

Mr. Darcy.”

“You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir.”

“Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Mrs. Our situation
with regard to Lady Catherine’s family is, indeed, the sort of
extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. “There
is nothing the matter with me. Woodhouse’s mind, or any wonderful change of his
nervous system, but by the operation of the same system in another
way.—Mrs. With such an
opinion, in confirmation of his own, Mr. The sanguine hope of good,
however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested, had not yet
deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that
every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father,
to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce the marriage. She felt your full meaning. But I have no right, and I could have no chance of
succeeding. “Pity me, dear Miss Dashwood!” said Lucy, as they walked up the stairs
together—for the Middletons arrived so directly after Mrs. It must be terrible for you to hear
it talked of; and as for your sister, I am sure I would not mention a
word about it to her for the world. Sometimes Mr. Assistance is impossible; condolence,
insufferable. I will call another day, and hear
the pianoforte.”

“Well, I am so sorry!—Oh! “I have made a most wretched discovery,” said he, after a short pause.—
“I have been here a week to-morrow—half my time. At last Emma attacked her on another ground. I did not immediately recollect. On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two
who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as
sportsmen, were in very good time. Her manners were
pronounced to be very bad indeed,--a mixture of pride and impertinence:
she had no conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty. Palmer laughed so
heartily at the question, as to show she understood it. Mr. It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed
circuit; which brought them again, after some time, in a descent among
hanging woods, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we
cannot escape the acquaintance now.”

The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished--that of Mrs. And there, beneath that
farthest hill, which rises with such grandeur, is our cottage.”

“It is a beautiful country,” he replied; “but these bottoms must be
dirty in winter.”

“How can you think of dirt, with such objects before you?”

“Because,” replied he, smiling, “among the rest of the objects before
me, I see a very dirty lane.”

“How strange!” said Marianne to herself as she walked on. It was not very flattering to Miss Campbell; but she
really did not seem to feel it.”

“So much the better—or so much the worse:—I do not know which. Emma found that it was not Mr. Cole. It was
a very useful note, for it supplied them with fresh matter for thought
and conversation during the rest of their lonely evening. Elizabeth again, and more
seriously, assured her of its truth. Cole or any other steady friend, when
she might not bear to see herself. They
had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,
unconnected with his general powers. An annuity is a very serious business; it comes over
and over every year, and there is no getting rid of it. What is the
foolish girl about?”

“Oh! Though she did not feel
the first intelligence as she might have done the day before, or an
hour before, its interest soon increased; and before their first
conversation was over, she had talked herself into all the sensations
of curiosity, wonder and regret, pain and pleasure, as to this
fortunate Miss Hawkins, which could conduce to place the Martins under
proper subordination in her fancy. “Who can this be?” cried Elinor. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. Palmer will be so happy to see you,” said she; “What do you think
he said when he heard of your coming with Mama? The day of separation and departure arrived; and Marianne, after taking
so particular and lengthened a leave of Mrs. You cannot think how happy I shall be! He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to
re-establish a character. You have sense, and we all
expect you to use it. The
faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible
in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger
which she had herself incurred in the business, had given something more
of fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. In the warmth of true contrition, she would call upon her the very next
morning, and it should be the beginning, on her side, of a regular,
equal, kindly intercourse. I hope you will think better of their looks to-morrow; for I
assure you Mr. Collins’s pretty friend had,
moreover, caught his fancy very much. Bennet’s curiosity; and
Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject. The more I think of it, the more
probable it appears. To talk would be only
to irritate.—She wrote to her, therefore, kindly, but decisively, to
beg that she would not, at present, come to Hartfield; acknowledging it
to be her conviction, that all farther confidential discussion of _one_
topic had better be avoided; and hoping, that if a few days were
allowed to pass before they met again, except in the company of
others—she objected only to a tête-à-tête—they might be able to act as
if they had forgotten the conversation of yesterday.—Harriet submitted,
and approved, and was grateful. Poor little dears, how glad they will be
to come. Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked heaven that _she_ had never
made so rude a speech. She now found, that in spite of herself, she had
always admitted a hope, while Edward remained single, that something
would occur to prevent his marrying Lucy; that some resolution of his
own, some mediation of friends, or some more eligible opportunity of
establishment for the lady, would arise to assist the happiness of all. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment
of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family
dinner. or is it equally criminal in every body? A dinner there must be. His coldness and reserve
mortified her severely; she was vexed and half angry; but resolving to
regulate her behaviour to him by the past rather than the present, she
avoided every appearance of resentment or displeasure, and treated him
as she thought he ought to be treated from the family connection. Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury, and was restored to the
comforts of her beloved home with the Campbells.—The Mr. What right had he to endeavour to please, as he
certainly did—to distinguish any one young woman with persevering
attention, as he certainly did—while he really belonged to another?—How
could he tell what mischief he might be doing?—How could he tell that
he might not be making me in love with him?—very wrong, very wrong
indeed.”

“From something that he said, my dear Emma, I rather imagine—”

“And how could _she_ bear such behaviour! I go to Oxford
tomorrow.”

“You would not have gone, however,” said Elinor, recovering herself,
and determined to get over what she so much dreaded as soon as
possible, “without receiving our good wishes, even if we had not been
able to give them in person. He was a married man, with only one living child, a
girl, about Jane’s age: and Jane became their guest, paying them long
visits and growing a favourite with all; and before she was nine years
old, his daughter’s great fondness for her, and his own wish of being a
real friend, united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of
undertaking the whole charge of her education. I shall go abroad for a couple of years—and when I return, I shall come
to you for my wife. My resolution of
thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect. “He meant, I believe,” replied Jane, “to go to Epsom, the place where
they last changed horses, see the postilions, and try if anything could
be made out from them. Woodhouse would not
suffer him to deceive himself long; and now he confessed his
persuasion, that such a transplantation would be a risk of her father’s
comfort, perhaps even of his life, which must not be hazarded. Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax? With all these circumstances to
favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest
Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness
of so many?’ What think you of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?” said
Jane, as she finished it. It was a most delightful reanimation of exhausted
spirits. Read it in comfort to yourself. She had little difficulty in understanding thus much of her rival’s
intentions, and while she was firmly resolved to act by her as every
principle of honour and honesty directed, to combat her own affection
for Edward and to see him as little as possible; she could not deny
herself the comfort of endeavouring to convince Lucy that her heart was
unwounded. Elton and Miss Hawkins; and there are the Coles,
such very good people; and the Perrys—I suppose there never was a
happier or a better couple than Mr. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has
her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the affection
she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still
more interesting from the hope we dare to entertain of her being
hereafter our sister. But while so many
were devoting him to Emma, and Emma herself making him over to Harriet,
Mr. “What is the gentleman’s name?”

“I must not tell, ma’am. Do you suppose him
really indifferent to her?”

“No, I cannot think that. Only to Honiton. She had suffered very much
from cramp after dancing, and her first attempt to mount the bank
brought on such a return of it as made her absolutely powerless—and in
this state, and exceedingly terrified, she had been obliged to remain. Very much grieved and concerned—I had
flattered myself that she must be better after such a cordial as I knew
had been given her in the morning.”

Emma smiled and answered—“My visit was of use to the nervous part of
her complaint, I hope; but not even I can charm away a sore throat; it
is a most severe cold indeed. Your sister need not have any scruple even of visiting
_her_, which, to say the truth, has been a little the case, and very
naturally; for we only knew that Mrs. I will answer for it, he never cared
three straws about her. “And that will tempt _you_, Miss Marianne.”

“A dance!” cried Marianne. Two dances, unfortunately, were all that could be allowed. Jennings,
with all her natural hilarity, burst forth again. Bennet, who quarrelled with no compliments, answered most readily,--

“You are very kind, sir, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may
prove so; for else they will be destitute enough. I know
Marianne’s heart: I know that she dearly loves me, and that I shall not
be the last to whom the affair is made known, when circumstances make
the revealment of it eligible. Elton. Jennings from the other side of the
room. Such
as it is, however, my pleasure in presenting it to him, will be very
great. Gardiner? They had not remained in this manner long, before Elinor perceived
Willoughby, standing within a few yards of them, in earnest
conversation with a very fashionable looking young woman. Mrs. Elton began to think she had been wrong in disclaiming so warmly. “Ah!” said Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr. Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her
waiting-woman was in it. Much had been done, and much had been said
in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers
had dined lately with their uncle; a private had been flogged; and it
had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married. Bennet indeed said little; but the
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax.”

They combated the point some time longer in the same way; Emma rather
gaining ground over the mind of her friend; for Mrs. Her heart was hardened against the belief of Mrs. Let me hear what it is.”

“We were talking of music, madam,” said he, when no longer able to avoid
a reply. Weston’s wishing it to
be communicated; especially to one, who, like Mr. He might not
be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be occasioned by no
housekeeper’s room, or a bad butler’s pantry, but no doubt he did
perfectly feel that Enscombe could not make him happy, and that
whenever he were attached, he would willingly give up much of wealth to
be allowed an early establishment. Mr. Collins was only a
clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news
to spread at Meryton. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Mr. I should be
unwilling, I own, to live in any other part of the town;—there is
hardly any other that I could be satisfied to have my children in: but
_we_ are so remarkably airy!—Mr. As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not, she endeavoured in
her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind. There is no
admiration between them, I do assure you; and the appearances which
have caught you, have arisen from some peculiar circumstances—feelings
rather of a totally different nature—it is impossible exactly to
explain:—there is a good deal of nonsense in it—but the part which is
capable of being communicated, which is sense, is, that they are as far
from any attachment or admiration for one another, as any two beings in
the world can be. “I had a few lines on parish business from Mr. To convince him, therefore,
that he had deceived himself was no very difficult point. how infinitely
superior!”

“Your indifference, however, towards that unfortunate girl—I must say
it, unpleasant to me as the discussion of such a subject may well
be—your indifference is no apology for your cruel neglect of her. Gardiner gave her the
particulars also of Miss Bingley’s visit in Gracechurch Street, and
repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the
acquaintance. So much superadded
decision of character! “How can you be so silly,” cried her mother, “as to think of such a
thing, in all this dirt! Exactly so, indeed—quite unheard of—but
some ladies say any thing. One does not know what to
think.”

“I beg your pardon;--one knows exactly what to think.”

But Jane could think with certainty on only one point,--that Mr. He is not a
gallant man, but he is a very humane one; and this, considering Jane
Fairfax’s ill-health, would appear a case of humanity to him;—and for
an act of unostentatious kindness, there is nobody whom I would fix on
more than on Mr. It is a reasonable
and laudable pride which resists such malevolence.”

“No, no,” cried Marianne, “misery such as mine has no pride. Elizabeth made no
answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which
she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Mrs. I wonder who the friend was—and who could be the young
lady. Mrs. But, however, I found
afterwards from Patty, that William said it was all the apples of
_that_ sort his master had; he had brought them all—and now his master
had not one left to bake or boil. Burgess, in
hopes, as I tell her, to fall in with the Doctor again. Only conceive how comfortable they will be! Frank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch; and though he did not
say much, his eyes declared that he meant to have a delightful evening. Oh,
it must be my uncle’s doings! With many compliments to them,
and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the
houses, he unfolded the matter,--to an audience not merely wondering,
but incredulous; for Mrs. Pray, pray attempt it. He had
the air of congratulating himself on having brought such a woman to
Highbury, as not even Miss Woodhouse could equal; and the greater part
of her new acquaintance, disposed to commend, or not in the habit of
judging, following the lead of Miss Bates’s good-will, or taking it for
granted that the bride must be as clever and as agreeable as she
professed herself, were very well satisfied; so that Mrs. Have you heard the news? Perry.—I want his directions no more than
his drugs.” He paused—and growing cooler in a moment, added, with only
sarcastic dryness, “If Mr. Elton was sitting here, I remember, much about where I
am now.”—

“Well, go on.”

“Oh! She
complained of it as they returned to Berkeley Street. “And pray
may I ask--” but checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, “Is it in
address that he improves? Mr. A year and a half is the very utmost that they can have lived
at West Hall; and how they got their fortune nobody knows. If there
were anyone that one could apply to, with a probability of gaining such
a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. or, what is more, could I have sacrificed hers? The case, you see, is—(but this is
quite between ourselves: I did not mention a syllable of it in the
other room. I am sure we do. For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read
great books, and make extracts.”

Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew not how. Good-by; I am sorry Miss Marianne was
not here. Certain it is that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I
was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no
less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done
anything to deserve to lose it. Before he could return to his chair, it was taken by Mrs. As a
child I was taught what was _right_, but I was not taught to correct my
temper. “If he would be so good as to read to them, it would be a kindness
indeed! Tell me
honestly” a deeper glow overspreading his cheeks, “do you think me most
a knave or a fool?”

Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than ever. Wickham walked into the room,
Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking
of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration. Mrs. Dashwood, attributing it to some want of
liberality in his mother, sat down to table indignant against all
selfish parents. More is avowedly due to _her_. The usual inquiries as to his success were
made by the latter. But at last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead
     of being allowed to be of use to his niece, was forced to put up
     with only having the probable credit of it, which went sorely
     against the grain; and I really believe your letter this morning
     gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that
     would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where
     it was due. As Harriet
described it, there had been an interesting mixture of wounded
affection and genuine delicacy in their behaviour. Smallridge’s, near Bristol, stared me
in the face. Wickham
were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball. He who, she had been
persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this
accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance; and
without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner,
where their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good
opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister. At first, while I supposed
you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver, I saw it only as
paternal kindness, and thought it the most natural thing in the world. She knew the limitations of her own powers too well to attempt more
than she could perform with credit; she wanted neither taste nor spirit
in the little things which are generally acceptable, and could
accompany her own voice well. She heard
enough to know that Mr. Good bye.”

He held out his hand. I have
heard him express himself so warmly on those points!—Such an admirer of
her performance on the pianoforte, and of her voice! She was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionate,
indulgent father; and had, in consequence of her sister’s marriage,
been mistress of his house from a very early period. But it ended in
nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool’s errand again.”

His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention
would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to
Netherfield. “I agree with you exactly. Ferrars, and the kind confidante of himself, talked to her a great
deal of the parsonage at Delaford, described its deficiencies, and told
her what he meant to do himself towards removing them.—His behaviour to
her in this, as well as in every other particular, his open pleasure in
meeting her after an absence of only ten days, his readiness to
converse with her, and his deference for her opinion, might very well
justify Mrs. The older a person
grows, Harriet, the more important it is that their manners should not
be bad; the more glaring and disgusting any loudness, or coarseness, or
awkwardness becomes. S.—_My_ representation, you see, has quite
appeased her.”

And again, on Emma’s merely turning her head to look at Mrs. I
might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ at
civility, I am thus rejected. You will be under
the care of a motherly good sort of woman, of whose kindness to you I
can have no doubt. Perry is
extremely concerned when any of us are ill. It
had been serviceable in deadening the first shock, without retaining
any influence to alarm. Knightley had
had no concern in giving the instrument. “You used us abominably ill,” answered Mrs. “What! “Excuse my interference; it was kindly meant.”

“Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. They are
wanted in the farm, Mr. A very few minutes more, however, completed the present trial. Knightley.’—You always called me, ‘Mr. His temper might perhaps be a little soured by
finding, like many others of his sex, that through some unaccountable
bias in favour of beauty, he was the husband of a very silly woman—but
she knew that this kind of blunder was too common for any sensible man
to be lastingly hurt by it. “I certainly saw Mr. Well may it be
doubted; for, had I really loved, could I have sacrificed my feelings
to vanity, to avarice? Frank Churchill are hearing every thing that passes. Mr. She was no sooner in possession of it, than
hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to be
interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches, and prepared to be
happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not
contain a denial. But
how sad it is that he should not live at home with his father! Woodhouse’s family, less as a
governess than a friend, very fond of both daughters, but particularly
of Emma. Neither would Mr. He was proud of his
conquest, proud of tricking Edward, and very proud of marrying
privately without his mother’s consent. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been
mistaken. Elton was called out of the room
before tea, old John Abdy’s son wanted to speak with him. Come as soon as you can on the receipt of
     this. Frank Churchill, I do guess.”

“You are right. A
few years however will settle her opinions on the reasonable basis of
common sense and observation; and then they may be more easy to define
and to justify than they now are, by any body but herself.”

“This will probably be the case,” he replied; “and yet there is
something so amiable in the prejudices of a young mind, that one is
sorry to see them give way to the reception of more general opinions.”

“I cannot agree with you there,” said Elinor. But they did pass away, and Mr. Marianne had now been brought by degrees, so much into the habit of
going out every day, that it was become a matter of indifference to
her, whether she went or not: and she prepared quietly and mechanically
for every evening’s engagement, though without expecting the smallest
amusement from any, and very often without knowing, till the last
moment, where it was to take her. After such behaviour, as I have witnessed during the last
month, to Miss Smith—such attentions as I have been in the daily habit
of observing—to be addressing me in this manner—this is an unsteadiness
of character, indeed, which I had not supposed possible! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a
book! His name was good, his
residence was in their favourite village, and she soon found out that
of all manly dresses a shooting-jacket was the most becoming. Mr. He meant not to be unkind, however,
and, as a mark of his affection for the three girls, he left them a
thousand pounds a-piece. I talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner,
     representing to her the wickedness of what she had done, and all
     the unhappiness she had brought on her family. I cannot bear to imagine
any reluctance on his side; but I am sure there is a great wish on the
Churchills’ to keep him to themselves. and very much to the purpose. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to
stand up with.”

“I would not be so fastidious as you are,” cried Bingley, “for a
kingdom! Every body
knows what is due to _you_.”

“It will not do,” whispered Frank to Emma; “they are most of them
affronted. [Illustration]

After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, Mr. Jennings,
that they all followed the servant at the same time:—“there is nobody
here but you, that can feel for me. She had nothing to say one day that she had not
said the day before. And here, instead of its being a matter of
condolence, it turns out to be one of congratulation.—I congratulate
you, Mr. “It must make you better satisfied that your other four are
single.”

“It is no such thing. In the few minutes’ conversation which she had yet had with him, while
Harriet had been partially insensible, he had spoken of her terror, her
naïveté, her fervour as she seized and clung to his arm, with a
sensibility amused and delighted; and just at last, after Harriet’s own
account had been given, he had expressed his indignation at the
abominable folly of Miss Bickerton in the warmest terms. Weston, “and on others, very little: and among those, on which she is
beyond his reach, it is but too likely, may be this very circumstance
of his coming away from them to visit us.”




CHAPTER XV


Mr. Miss Dashwood—a subject such as this—untouched for
fourteen years—it is dangerous to handle it at all! You know how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing her; but the
very moment I was introduced, there was such an affability in her
behaviour as really should seem to say, she had quite took a fancy to
me. Elinor’s heart was full. Bennet and Mrs. Suckling’s own family, and Mrs. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty
girl for a few weeks, and, when accident separates them, so easily
forgets her, that these sort of inconstancies are very frequent.”

[Illustration:

     “Offended two or three young ladies”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“An excellent consolation in its way,” said Elizabeth; “but it will not
do for _us_. I wish her
extremely well: and, no doubt, there are men who might not object
to—Every body has their level: but as for myself, I am not, I think,
quite so much at a loss. You quite shock me; if you mean a fling at
the slave-trade, I assure you Mr. The insipidity of the
meeting was exactly such as Elinor had expected; it produced not one
novelty of thought or expression, and nothing could be less interesting
than the whole of their discourse both in the dining parlour and
drawing room: to the latter, the children accompanied them, and while
they remained there, she was too well convinced of the impossibility of
engaging Lucy’s attention to attempt it. “Your
cousin’s conduct does not suit my feelings. In such a case,
a plain and open avowal of his difficulties would have been more to his
honour I think, as well as more consistent with his general
character;—but I will not raise objections against any one’s conduct on
so illiberal a foundation, as a difference in judgment from myself, or
a deviation from what I may think right and consistent.”

“You speak very properly. “Of what are you talking?”

“Of Mr. My mother often talks of
your good-nature. She was
vexed beyond what could have been expressed—almost beyond what she
could conceal. Elinor sat down to her drawing-table as soon as he was out of the
house, busily employed herself the whole day, neither sought nor
avoided the mention of his name, appeared to interest herself almost as
much as ever in the general concerns of the family, and if, by this
conduct, she did not lessen her own grief, it was at least prevented
from unnecessary increase, and her mother and sisters were spared much
solicitude on her account. Bennet replied that he had not. “So prettily done! I was most uncommonly shocked, indeed! _That_ is all settled.”

“What is all settled?” repeated the other, as she ran into her room to
prepare. There
seems to me a very decided difference. “I wonder,” said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, “whether he is
likely to be in this country much longer.”

“I do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of his going away when I
was at Netherfield. She has now
been a longer time stationary there, than she ever was before, and she
begins to want change. He was often hoping, intending to come—but was always prevented. I am sorry to say that my
patronage ends with this; and my interest is hardly more extensive. His company so sought after, that every body
says he need not eat a single meal by himself if he does not chuse it;
that he has more invitations than there are days in the week. Edward saw enough to comprehend, not only the meaning of
others, but such of Marianne’s expressions as had puzzled him before;
and when their visitors left them, he went immediately round her, and
said, in a whisper, “I have been guessing. Two maids and two men, indeed! It seemed like the forerunner of something absolutely
serious, which she did not wish. Knightley, instead of being
immediately off likewise, sat down again, seemingly inclined for more
chat. I must put on a few ornaments
now, because it is expected of me. Emma, I
must tell you what you will not ask, though I may wish it unsaid the
next moment.”

“Oh! You are always with me.”

“Dating from three o’clock yesterday. It has
been dignified and liberal. She continued by the side of her sister, with little intermission the
whole afternoon, calming every fear, satisfying every inquiry of her
enfeebled spirits, supplying every succour, and watching almost every
look and every breath. Collins was gratified; and with a more smiling
solemnity replied,--

“It gives me the greatest pleasure to hear that you have passed your
time not disagreeably. “When I consider,” she added, in a yet more agitated voice, “that _I_
might have prevented it! Miss Bates was obliged to return without success; Jane was quite
unpersuadable; the mere proposal of going out seemed to make her
worse.—Emma wished she could have seen her, and tried her own powers;
but, almost before she could hint the wish, Miss Bates made it appear
that she had promised her niece on no account to let Miss Woodhouse in. I guessed as much.” And
though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much
the case. Go, and interfere. Weston. “Dear, dear Norland,” said Elinor, “probably looks much as it always
does at this time of the year. [Illustration]

Elizabeth related to Jane, the next day, what had passed between Mr. In the daily interchange of news, they must be again
restricted to the other topics with which for a while the Sucklings’
coming had been united, such as the last accounts of Mrs. Poor Fanny! Well, pretty good news, is not it? “I will have you _both_ go,” said Mrs. Bennet for
a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach
conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the
girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room,
that Mr. Elinor watched his countenance and saw its
expression becoming more tranquil. It would vex me, indeed, to see you again
the dupe of Miss Bingley’s pretended regard.”

“Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last November he
really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of _my_ being indifferent
would have prevented his coming down again?”

“He made a little mistake, to be sure; but it is to the credit of his
modesty.”

This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and
the little value he put on his own good qualities. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should be
     almost tempted to say, that there is a strong appearance of
     duplicity in all this. In the height of her morality, good woman! After some
time spent in saying little or doing less, Lady Middleton sat down to
Cassino, and as Marianne was not in spirits for moving about, she and
Elinor luckily succeeding to chairs, placed themselves at no great
distance from the table. Her favourite walk, and where
she frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was
along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was
a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and
where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine’s curiosity. Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. “But what,” said she, after a pause, “can have been his motive? Weston had walked in. How do you do?—Very well, I thank you. What she would engage to do towards augmenting their income was next to
be considered; and here it plainly appeared, that though Edward was now
her only son, he was by no means her eldest; for while Robert was
inevitably endowed with a thousand pounds a-year, not the smallest
objection was made against Edward’s taking orders for the sake of two
hundred and fifty at the utmost; nor was anything promised either for
the present or in future, beyond the ten thousand pounds, which had
been given with Fanny. This proves that he can
leave the Churchills.”

“Yes, sometimes he can.”

“And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while; whenever
there is any temptation of pleasure.”

“It is very unfair to judge of any body’s conduct, without an intimate
knowledge of their situation. He was writing, and, without raising his head, coolly
replied,--

“Just as you please.”

“May we take my uncle’s letter to read to her?”

“Take whatever you like, and get away.”

Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went upstairs
together. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the
affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed. So far from hence! Hughes for a
moment.—How do you do? Woodhouse. I know it cannot be long.”

He readily assured her of his secrecy, again expressed his sorrow for
her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present
reason to hope, and, leaving his compliments for her relations, with
only one serious parting look, went away. How was that possible? She is an excellent housemaid, and
works very well at her needle. Jennings, indeed, were
not so nice; their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour;—but
one evening, Mrs. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but
slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the
house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally
cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh. She was carried out of the room therefore in
her mother’s arms, in quest of this medicine, and as the two boys chose
to follow, though earnestly entreated by their mother to stay behind,
the four young ladies were left in a quietness which the room had not
known for many hours. Jennings is from home.”

“I will not trust to _that_,” retreating to her own room. CHAPTER XLI. She must be collected and calm. Elton had very readily acceded to it, so it
was to be, if she had no objection. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in
the course of Jane and Elizabeth’s correspondence with her, made her
sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the
conversation. My dear Miss Woodhouse—I
come quite over-powered. Elton’s—a neighbour of Maple Grove; and, by the
bye, I wonder how Mrs. It soothed, but
it could not console her for the contempt which had been thus
self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered that
Jane’s disappointment had, in fact, been the work of her nearest
relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt
by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she
had ever known before. Have you no comforts? But he judged it unnecessary: he had still something more to try, some
more fresh application, of whose success he was as confident as the
last, and his visit concluded with encouraging assurances which reached
the ear, but could not enter the heart of Miss Dashwood. To Mrs. Woodhouse told me of it. Bennet the next
morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him. Knightley. It was some
comfort to him that many inquiries after himself and Miss Woodhouse
(for his neighbours knew that he loved to be inquired after), as well
as Miss Smith, were coming in during the rest of the day; and he had
the pleasure of returning for answer, that they were all very
indifferent—which, though not exactly true, for she was perfectly well,
and Harriet not much otherwise, Emma would not interfere with. Every thing so good!”

Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma; and as soon as Miss
Bates was quiet, she found herself necessarily overhearing the
discourse of Mrs. Weston’s wedding-cake in their hands: but Mr. Except the Sucklings and
Bragges, there is not such another nursery establishment, so liberal
and elegant, in all Mrs. Palmer, or any friend that may be able to assist us.—Poor Anne was much
to blame for what she did, but she did it for the best, so I say
nothing; hope Mrs. The strength of the
song falls on the second.”

Mr. “I am going
to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.”

“You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me
to play and sing before anybody and everybody! Knightley, who had
left the room immediately after his brother’s first report of the snow,
came back again, and told them that he had been out of doors to
examine, and could answer for there not being the smallest difficulty
in their getting home, whenever they liked it, either now or an hour
hence. Your case is a very unfortunate one;
you seem to me to be surrounded with difficulties, and you will have
need of all your mutual affection to support you under them. She rejoiced in his being cleared from some part of his
imputed guilt;—she was sorry for him;—she wished him happy. Much as you suffer
now, think of what you would have suffered if the discovery of his
character had been delayed to a later period—if your engagement had
been carried on for months and months, as it might have been, before he
chose to put an end to it. Such a heart—such a Harriet! CHAPTER XXXII. Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be
pleased. Elton himself, and that their business
was to help to persuade him into it, which was done pretty soon.—Mr. He is just as
superior as ever;—but being married, you know, it is quite a different
thing. You may imagine how desirable! There was now an interest,
however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible
that the authority of a servant, who had known him since he was four
years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be
hastily rejected. I had no
intention, I thought I had no power of staying more than five minutes,
when I first entered the house. This is three times as large.—And you have never any odd humours, my
dear.”

“How often we shall be going to see them, and they coming to see us!—We
shall be always meeting! Mr. But last February,
almost a twelvemonth back, she suddenly disappeared. It was Miss Taylor’s
loss which first brought grief. Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as
with Mr. Weston, “if it be not very disagreeable to
you. And so well was she able to answer her own expectations,
that when she joined them at dinner only two hours after she had first
suffered the extinction of all her dearest hopes, no one would have
supposed from the appearance of the sisters, that Elinor was mourning
in secret over obstacles which must divide her for ever from the object
of her love, and that Marianne was internally dwelling on the
perfections of a man, of whose whole heart she felt thoroughly
possessed, and whom she expected to see in every carriage which drove
near their house. If he were deficient there, nothing should make amends
for it. Come, come, let’s have no
secrets among friends.”

He replied with his accustomary mildness to all her inquiries, but
without satisfying her in any. John
Knightley, hearing his own name. He understood that she was in need of a
dwelling; and though the house he now offered her was merely a cottage,
he assured her that everything should be done to it which she might
think necessary, if the situation pleased her. But, as it was, she only learned, from some very significant
looks, how far their penetration, founded on Margaret’s instructions,
extended. Darcy. Nay, he appeared so much otherwise, that his daughter’s courage
failed. Weston began to move.—“He must be going. Woodhouse, who being, according to his custom on
such occasions, making the circle of his guests, and paying his
particular compliments to the ladies, was ending with her—and with all
his mildest urbanity, said,

“I am very sorry to hear, Miss Fairfax, of your being out this morning
in the rain. There were three others, Jane says, which they hesitated about some
time. Long has just been here, and she
told me all about it.”

Mr. His rank in society I would alter if I could, which is
saying a great deal I assure you, Emma.—You laugh at me about William
Larkins; but I could quite as ill spare Robert Martin.”

He wanted her to look up and smile; and having now brought herself not
to smile too broadly—she did—cheerfully answering,

“You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to the match. Dashwood. Marianne’s preserver, as Margaret, with more elegance than precision,
styled Willoughby, called at the cottage early the next morning to make
his personal enquiries. How you must have hated me after _that_ evening!”

“Hate you! Mrs. I thought too ill of him to invite him
to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. Harriet was to sit again the next day; and Mr. I wish Hetty had not gone. She only wished that
it were less openly shown; and once or twice did venture to suggest the
propriety of some self-command to Marianne. Collins,
very gravely--“but I cannot imagine that her Ladyship would at all
disapprove of you. I shall send this by
     express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. Perry and the children, how are they? The introduction must be unpleasant,
whenever it takes place; and the sooner it could be over, the better.”

“Yes; and every delay makes one more apprehensive of other delays. The idea of Edward’s being a clergyman, and living
in a small parsonage-house, diverted him beyond measure;—and when to
that was added the fanciful imagery of Edward reading prayers in a
white surplice, and publishing the banns of marriage between John Smith
and Mary Brown, he could conceive nothing more ridiculous. Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Woodhouse’s peculiarities and
fidgetiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational remonstrance or
sharp retort equally ill-bestowed. Elinor, having once delivered her opinion on William’s side, by which
she offended Mrs. I abhor every common-place phrase by which wit is
intended; and ‘setting one’s cap at a man,’ or ‘making a conquest,’ are
the most odious of all. After waiting at home every morning
for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the
visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and, yet
more, the alteration of her manner, would allow Jane to deceive herself
no longer. The quiet, heart-felt
satisfaction of the old lady, and the rapturous delight of her
daughter—who proved even too joyous to talk as usual, had been a
gratifying, yet almost an affecting, scene. Elton, and
found to his great surprize, that Mr. Weston and
Emma were sitting together on a sofa. March was to take
Elizabeth to Hunsford. I cannot quite agree with you _there_. When the marriage takes place, I fear she must hear of it all.”

“But why should such precaution be used? Ladies and gentlemen—I
am ordered by Miss Woodhouse to say, that she waives her right of
knowing exactly what you may all be thinking of, and only requires
something very entertaining from each of you, in a general way. Elton. Knightley.—Every other part of her mind
was disgusting. Jennings’s forebodings, was
not in a state of mind to resist their influence. I will keep my
ill-humour to myself. The news was universally a surprize wherever it spread; and Mr. This Mrs. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how
imprudent a match it must be. I have not the least idea of his being a weak young man:
I feel sure that he is not. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XXXII. He was reckoned
very handsome; his person much admired in general, though not by her,
there being a want of elegance of feature which she could not dispense
with:—but the girl who could be gratified by a Robert Martin’s riding
about the country to get walnuts for her might very well be conquered
by Mr. Hurst soon found even his open
petition rejected. Bennet luckily stood
in such awe of her intended son-in-law, that she ventured not to speak
to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark
her deference for his opinion. The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing
civilities towards herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a
compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than
gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before
her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage
was exceedingly agreeable to _her_. There is an anxiety, a curiosity in what one
feels for Emma. She hated having visitors in the house
while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the
most disagreeable. My cousins have been so plaguing me! They shall no longer worry others, nor
torture myself. Never in her life had Elinor found it so difficult to be calm, as at
that moment. Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. What will you think of my vanity? He sat a little while in
doubt. She saw it with concern;
for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope, when opposed to a
very lively one of five and twenty? Elinor was to be the
comforter of others in her own distresses, no less than in theirs; and
all the comfort that could be given by assurances of her own composure
of mind, and a very earnest vindication of Edward from every charge but
of imprudence, was readily offered. Nothing
could do away the knowledge of what the latter had suffered through his
means, nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards Eliza. for, if we had met first in the drawing-room, I doubt whether
you would have discerned me to be more of a gentleman than usual.—You
might not have distinguished how I came, by my look or manner.”

“Yes I should, I am sure I should. “Lady Middleton is really a most elegant
woman! But Mr. “I hope my dear Miss Dashwood will excuse the liberty I take of writing
to her; but I know your friendship for me will make you pleased to hear
such a good account of myself and my dear Edward, after all the
troubles we have went through lately, therefore will make no more
apologies, but proceed to say that, thank God! Resentment could not have been more plainly spoken than
in a civility to her father, from which she was so pointedly excluded. For about three years I heard little of him; but on the
decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him,
he applied to me again by letter for the presentation. He tried to reason
himself out of fears, which the different judgment of the apothecary
seemed to render absurd; but the many hours of each day in which he was
left entirely alone, were but too favourable for the admission of every
melancholy idea, and he could not expel from his mind the persuasion
that he should see Marianne no more. _You_ cannot have
been always at Longbourn.”

Elizabeth looked surprised. It was
through a series of strange blunders!”

“And, in return for your acknowledging so much, I will do you the
justice to say, that you would have chosen for him better than he has
chosen for himself.—Harriet Smith has some first-rate qualities, which
Mrs. John Knightley disperse his ill-humour. She found him,
however, perfectly the gentleman in his behaviour to all his visitors,
and only occasionally rude to his wife and her mother; she found him
very capable of being a pleasant companion, and only prevented from
being so always, by too great an aptitude to fancy himself as much
superior to people in general, as he must feel himself to be to Mrs. But on the third morning after his arrival in
Hertfordshire, she saw him from her dressing-room window enter the
paddock, and ride towards the house. Knightley, I am going to do so-and-so; papa says I
may, or I have Miss Taylor’s leave’—something which, you knew, I did
not approve. Darcy did not wish for cards, and Mr. It was well that he took every body’s joy for granted, or he might not
have thought either Mr. Why should there be any change?”

“I do not know, my dear—but it is so long since she was here!—not since
last Easter, and then only for a few days.—Mr. Good morning to you, my dear sir. A Miss Hawkins—”

“I was with Mr. They will soon be in
Yorkshire. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soon
done--done while Mrs. Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. It is admirable!”

Elizabeth tried to join in her father’s pleasantry, but could only force
one most reluctant smile. Yet as she was convinced that Marianne’s
affection for Willoughby, could leave no hope of Colonel Brandon’s
success, whatever the event of that affection might be, and at the same
time wished to shield her conduct from censure, she thought it most
prudent and kind, after some consideration, to say more than she really
knew or believed. This is the simple truth.”

Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so; but still they admired
her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one whom
they should not object to know more of. Knightley—or for the
Churchills—or even for Mr. Would not Harriet be the very creature described? I must get on
to Kingston as fast as I can.”

“Oh! Knightley was standing just here, was not he? A man of honour could not have doubted the
intention, but Mr. Unwilling as she
was to admit an idea so destructive to Jane’s happiness, and so
dishonourable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its
frequently recurring. It is downright labour to him where ladies are concerned. They added to their house, to their
number of servants, to their expenses of every sort; and by this time
were, in fortune and style of living, second only to the family at
Hartfield. It
was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. “Ever since the day—about four years ago—that Miss Taylor and I met
with him in Broadway Lane, when, because it began to drizzle, he darted
away with so much gallantry, and borrowed two umbrellas for us from
Farmer Mitchell’s, I made up my mind on the subject. Your tempers are by no means unlike. It would have spared her, she thought,
one sleepless night out of two. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy
were to entertain each other. The man who fetches our letters every morning
(one of our men, I forget his name) shall inquire for yours too and
bring them to you. He has heartily forgiven me
now.”

Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. If I had not promoted Mr. Beyond
you three, is there a creature in the world whom I would not rather
suspect of evil than Willoughby, whose heart I know so well?”

Elinor would not contend, and only replied, “Whoever may have been so
detestably your enemy, let them be cheated of their malignant triumph,
my dear sister, by seeing how nobly the consciousness of your own
innocence and good intentions supports your spirits. I am very sure myself,
that had Willoughby turned out as really amiable, as he has proved
himself the contrary, Marianne would yet never have been so happy with
_him_ as she will be with Colonel Brandon.”

She paused.—Her daughter could not quite agree with her, but her
dissent was not heard, and therefore gave no offence. It came out
quite unawares, quite undesignedly. The plan was that she should be brought up for educating others; the
very few hundred pounds which she inherited from her father making
independence impossible. what can
have induced him to behave so cruelly?”

“A thorough, determined dislike of me--a dislike which I cannot but
attribute in some measure to jealousy. Churchill rules at Enscombe, and is a very odd-tempered
woman; and his coming now, depends upon her being willing to spare
him.”

“Oh, Mrs. “Oh! Thank God I have not _that_ pain. Mr. Well, poor thing! [Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII


[Illustration]

“I hope, my dear,” said Mr. he had never written, hardly ever, any thing of the kind in his
life. Yes, Harriet,
just so long have I been wanting the very circumstance to happen that
has happened. She was a woman of mean understanding,
little information, and uncertain temper. Palmer’s, I found Charlotte quite in a fuss about the child. And in the wretched state of his own
finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to
his fear of discovery by Lydia’s relations; for it had just transpired
that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount. “Indeed I will. In that respect Mrs. Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told
her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs. With a strong
prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of
what had happened at Netherfield. It was a large, handsome stone
building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high
woody hills; and in front a stream of some natural importance was
swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. I understand it was a very
handsome letter, indeed. Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though
little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance
womanly and graceful. Perry. With almost every other man in the world, it would be an
alarming prospect; but Edward’s affection and constancy nothing can
deprive me of I know.”

“That conviction must be every thing to you; and he is undoubtedly
supported by the same trust in your’s. Miss Nash thinks either of the Coxes would be very glad to
marry him.”

“Very likely.—I think they are, without exception, the most vulgar
girls in Highbury.”

Harriet had business at Ford’s.—Emma thought it most prudent to go with
her. You see how delightfully she writes. Well, but now for
my news: it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is not it? However, I got a very good husband, and I don’t know what
the greatest beauty can do more. Do not beat me.”




CHAPTER XVI


Every body in and about Highbury who had ever visited Mr. What formidable obstacle is she now to bring forward? But that won’t do now-a-days; nothing in the way of pleasure can
ever be given up by the young men of this age.”

“Do you know what kind of a girl Miss Grey is? Nonsense! But have I ever known it? “And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters
behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the
winter is over.”

“I thank you for my share of the favour,” said Elizabeth; “but I do not
particularly like your way of getting husbands.”

Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the
card-table--but in vain. Are you, indeed, going there? While they were at breakfast the letters were brought in. They had often attempted it before: but it was a subject on which Mrs. She
must be attached to you, or she would not have married you. Jennings only exchanged one form of delight for another, and still
without forfeiting her expectation of the first. She had never been admitted before to be seriously ill. CHAPTER VII


They had a very fine day for Box Hill; and all the other outward
circumstances of arrangement, accommodation, and punctuality, were in
favour of a pleasant party. She had been satisfied to hear and believe just
what Mrs. ‘Oh!’ said he, ‘I
do think I can fasten the rivet; I like a job of this kind
excessively.’—Which you know shewed him to be so very.... In
short, it is a kind of thing that”—lowering his voice to an important
whisper—“will be exceedingly welcome to _all parties_.” Recollecting
himself, however, he added, “That is, I mean to say—your friends are
all truly anxious to see you well settled; Fanny particularly, for she
has your interest very much at heart, I assure you. Weston, on that score. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy’s
meditated elopement. His countenance, as he entered the room, was not too happy, even for
Elinor. It
will be felt so great an attention! She was dying to know what could be his
meaning--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him. After
lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation of
thinking that Mr. The house, too, as
described by Sir John, was on so simple a scale, and the rent so
uncommonly moderate, as to leave her no right of objection on either
point; and, therefore, though it was not a plan which brought any charm
to her fancy, though it was a removal from the vicinity of Norland
beyond her wishes, she made no attempt to dissuade her mother from
sending a letter of acquiescence. The result of his reverie was, “No,
Emma, I do not think the extent of my admiration for her will ever take
me by surprize.—I never had a thought of her in that way, I assure
you.” And soon afterwards, “Jane Fairfax is a very charming young
woman—but not even Jane Fairfax is perfect. But the compassionate feelings of a friend of her father gave a change
to her destiny. Whatever they may have been, however, she may
now, and hereafter doubtless _will_ turn with gratitude towards her own
condition, when she compares it with that of my poor Eliza, when she
considers the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor girl, and
pictures her to herself, with an affection for him so strong, still as
strong as her own, and with a mind tormented by self-reproach, which
must attend her through life. Suckling had completed
the purchase before his death.”

They were interrupted. I assure you I have no doubt of
its doing Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly
occurred. She was your governess, I think?”

Emma was almost too much astonished to answer; but Mrs. Her understanding
excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. It cannot be for _me_, it cannot be for _my_ sake
that his manners are thus softened. “It is truly astonishing!”—he cried, after hearing what she said—“what
could be the Colonel’s motive?”

“A very simple one—to be of use to Mr. Dixon! Now, be
sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”

“For the liveliness of your mind I did.”

“You may as well call it impertinence at once. Elton’s way before—and no degree of vanity can
prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action, if
not in consciousness.”

“I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax,” said Emma. But though _she_ never
spoke of it out of her own family, Elinor could see its influence on
her mind, in the something like confusion of countenance with which she
entered, and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself. Let us have patience. The officers may not be so pleasant in General----’s
regiment.”

His daughter’s request, for such it might be considered, of being
admitted into her family again, before she set off for the north,
received at first an absolute negative. Did you see it?”

Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations. Teasing, teasing man! They had, therefore, many
acquaintance in common; and, though Wickham had been little there since
the death of Darcy’s father, five years before, it was yet in his power
to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had been
in the way of procuring. They
are seen only as a nuisance, swept hastily off, and driven as much as
possible from the sight.”

“It is not every one,” said Elinor, “who has your passion for dead
leaves.”

“No; my feelings are not often shared, not often understood. Miss Darcy, on her brother’s
entrance, exerted herself much more to talk; and Elizabeth saw that he
was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded,
as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. I think Miss Fairfax dances very well; and Mrs. Emma remained in a state of vexation too; but there was more
indistinctness in the causes of her’s, than in his. As
soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her
cousin to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which,
for Charlotte’s sake, she made more favourable than it really was. the blessing of a female correspondent, when one is really
interested in the absent!—she will tell me every thing. The constant attention of Mr. His own two thousand pounds she protested should be
his all; she would never see him again; and so far would she be from
affording him the smallest assistance, that if he were to enter into
any profession with a view of better support, she would do all in her
power to prevent him advancing in it.”

Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clapped her hands
together, and cried, “Gracious God! Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.”

Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and
Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech, was afraid
her anxiety had done no good. Elton seemed to think it as much her duty as Mrs. Tell her of my misery and my
penitence—tell her that my heart was never inconstant to her, and if
you will, that at this moment she is dearer to me than ever.”

“I will tell her all that is necessary to what may comparatively be
called, your justification. Palmer, whose eye was caught by every thing pretty, expensive, or new;
who was wild to buy all, could determine on none, and dawdled away her
time in rapture and indecision. Only think what an establishment it would
be for one of them. [Illustration:

     “A note for Miss Bennet”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER VII. Knightley very much?—He would not deny
that he did, she was sure.—Whom did he ever want to consult on business
but Mr. A sudden freak seemed to have seized him at
breakfast, and he had sent for a chaise and set off, intending to
return to dinner, but with no more important view that appeared than
having his hair cut. Miss Woodhouse was so great a personage
in Highbury, that the prospect of the introduction had given as much
panic as pleasure; but the humble, grateful little girl went off with
highly gratified feelings, delighted with the affability with which
Miss Woodhouse had treated her all the evening, and actually shaken
hands with her at last! or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?”

“You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s concerns,” said Darcy,
in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour. The rapid decay, the
early death of a girl so young, so lovely as Marianne, must have struck
a less interested person with concern. I hope I have a better taste than
to think of Mr. I never saw anything so
charming! Churchill,
whose health seemed every day to supply a different report, and the
situation of Mrs. Marianne told her,
with the greatest delight, that Willoughby had given her a horse, one
that he had bred himself on his estate in Somersetshire, and which was
exactly calculated to carry a woman. Now, Mr. He may have as strong a sense of what would be right,
as you can have, without being so equal, under particular
circumstances, to act up to it.”

“Then it would not be so strong a sense. Elton, my astonishment is much beyond any thing I can
express. I never met with a disposition
more truly amiable.”

“I have no doubt of it.” And it was spoken with a sort of sighing
animation, which had a vast deal of the lover. She
is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool; gone to stay. I think you play quite
as well as she does. Neither could she deny the justice
of his description of Jane. My dear Jane, Mr. On the strength of Darcy’s regard, Bingley
had the firmest reliance, and of his judgment the highest opinion. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman. Cole’s. Dashwood)
but you have made it so charming! “Your sister,” he continued, “has suffered dreadfully. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner
at Pemberley, before they left the country. you forget
yourself—you take me for my friend—any message to Miss Smith I shall be
happy to deliver; but no more of this to _me_, if you please.”

“Miss Smith!—message to Miss Smith!—What could she possibly mean!”—And
he repeated her words with such assurance of accent, such boastful
pretence of amazement, that she could not help replying with quickness,

“Mr. He had
been blamable, highly blamable, in remaining at Norland after he first
felt her influence over him to be more than it ought to be. Miss Bates’s powerful, argumentative mind might
have strengthened yours.”

“Yes—I _have_ called there; passing the door, I thought it better. The next morning
brought another short note from Marianne—still affectionate, open,
artless, confiding—everything that could make _my_ conduct most
hateful. I thought our judgments were
given us merely to be subservient to those of neighbours. Bennet. Undoubtedly if you wish it, I will endeavour to persuade them both.”
And away he ran. Perhaps he has not observed you yet.”

This however was more than she could believe herself; and to be
composed at such a moment was not only beyond the reach of Marianne, it
was beyond her wish. And you saw the
old housekeeper, I suppose? Till I was in Kent, and saw
so much both of Mr. Weston were both dreadfully
desponding. Weston ought to have found more in it, for she had
a husband whose warm heart and sweet temper made him think every thing
due to her in return for the great goodness of being in love with him;
but though she had one sort of spirit, she had not the best. The Randalls party agreed to it immediately;
and after a pretty long speech from Miss Bates, which few persons
listened to, she also found it possible to accept dear Miss Woodhouse’s
most obliging invitation. but what shall you do? But I am willing
to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood. She has been gone longer already than she
intended.”

“Something has happened to delay her; some visitors perhaps.”

“Highbury gossips!—Tiresome wretches!”

“Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would.”

Emma knew this was too true for contradiction, and therefore said
nothing. Had it been your uncle’s doing, I must and _would_ have
paid him; but these violent young lovers carry everything their own
way. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up
and down the room in earnest meditation; his brow contracted, his air
gloomy. He then really thought himself equal to it. “It
would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference; but I can
hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to
anyone. She was particularly struck by his manner of
considering Mr. Whether he were overhearing too, she
could not determine. This must be the grossest falsehood!”--and when she had
gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the
last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not
regard it, that she would never look in it again. But, my dear, we must touch up the Colonel to
do some thing to the parsonage, and make it comfortable for them,
before Lucy goes to it.”

“But Colonel Brandon does not seem to have any idea of the living’s
being enough to allow them to marry.”

“The Colonel is a ninny, my dear; because he has two thousand a-year
himself, he thinks that nobody else can marry on less. How is
such a man to be worked on? Suckling, who has been eleven
years a resident at Maple Grove, and whose father had it before him—I
believe, at least—I am almost sure that old Mr. He saw that Emma had soon made it out, and found it highly
entertaining, though it was something which she judged it proper to
appear to censure; for she said, “Nonsense! When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria’s alarm was every moment
increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm. How far your nephew might approve of your interference in _his_ affairs,
I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in
mine. I shall be at home in twenty
minutes.”

“But it is too far, indeed it is, to be walking quite alone. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is
charming. Darcy, for now they _do_ appear wholly
undeserved.”

“Certainly. Why would you be
persuaded by my uncle, Sir Robert, against your own judgment, to place
Edward under private tuition, at the most critical time of his life? It is encouraging people to marry if you
make so much of them.”

“No, my dear, I never encouraged any body to marry, but I would always
wish to pay every proper attention to a lady—and a bride, especially,
is never to be neglected. She was quite one of her worthies—the most
amiable, affable, delightful woman—just as accomplished and
condescending as Mrs. But there was still something
lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the disclosure. In Bond
Street especially, where much of their business lay, her eyes were in
constant inquiry; and in whatever shop the party were engaged, her mind
was equally abstracted from every thing actually before them, from all
that interested and occupied the others. Mr. Weston, it would not have
struck her. Woodhouse, understanding but in part. Knightley coolly, and resuming the
letter. “He comes from
Mr. Weston need not spend
a single evening in the year alone if he did not like it. Jennings
too, trust she will speak a good word for us to Sir John, or Mr. John
Dashwood wished it likewise; but in the mean while, till one of these
superior blessings could be attained, it would have quieted her
ambition to see him driving a barouche. Follies
and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, _do_ divert me, I own, and I
laugh at them whenever I can. Ferrars;—that her interest and her vanity should so
very much blind her as to make the attention which seemed only paid her
because she was _not Elinor_, appear a compliment to herself—or to
allow her to derive encouragement from a preference only given her,
because her real situation was unknown. You, Miss Dashwood, would give a
general commission for every new print of merit to be sent you—and as
for Marianne, I know her greatness of soul, there would not be music
enough in London to content her. Her mother too, in whose mind not one speculative thought of their
marriage had been raised, by his prospect of riches, was led before the
end of a week to hope and expect it; and secretly to congratulate
herself on having gained two such sons-in-law as Edward and Willoughby. You must see the difference.”

“Oh yes!—there is a great difference. Elinor would not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable as
what she now sought; and with a mind anxiously pre-arranging its
result, and a resolution of reviving the subject again, should Marianne
fail to do it, she turned into the parlour to fulfill her parting
injunction. To you—to my two daughters—I may venture on the
truth. Elinor could not _now_ be made unhappy by this behaviour. At length Darcy spoke, and in a
constrained manner said,--

“Mr. The young man’s conduct, and his sister’s, seemed
the result of real feeling, and she could not but pity them. It would be dreadful
to be standing so close! He began to wish to know more of her; and, as a step towards conversing
with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. Knightley and I both saying we liked it, and
Mr. Dixon, which she had so
naturally started to herself. Sir John could do no more;
but he did not know that any more was required: to be together was, in
his opinion, to be intimate, and while his continual schemes for their
meeting were effectual, he had not a doubt of their being established
friends. There was one part,
especially the opening of it, which I should dread your having the power
of reading again. Donavan found the house in all this
uproar. Her form,
though not so correct as her sister’s, in having the advantage of
height, was more striking; and her face was so lovely, that when in the
common cant of praise, she was called a beautiful girl, truth was less
violently outraged than usually happens. In the way of love, I
am sure he does not. He
must have all Edward’s virtues, and his person and manners must
ornament his goodness with every possible charm.”

“Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen. Goddard’s, and that the intelligence would
undoubtedly rush upon her without preparation. “And now we shall
just miss them; too provoking!—I do not know when I have been so
disappointed.” And she leaned back in the corner, to indulge her
murmurs, or to reason them away; probably a little of both—such being
the commonest process of a not ill-disposed mind. I left her this morning with her lawyer, talking
over the business.”

“Well!” said Mrs. She has been taught nothing useful, and is too
young and too simple to have acquired any thing herself. His
remembrance can be overcome by no change of circumstances or opinions. If they are anxious to
see you _happily_ married, here is a man whose amiable character gives
every assurance of it;—if they wish to have you settled in the same
country and circle which they have chosen to place you in, here it will
be accomplished; and if their only object is that you should, in the
common phrase, be _well_ married, here is the comfortable fortune, the
respectable establishment, the rise in the world which must satisfy
them.”

“Yes, very true. Their party was now farther reduced;
for Mr. Elton. Look at the tree.”

“But it is never safe to sit out of doors, my dear.”

“You, sir, may say any thing,” cried Mr. When
the Westons arrived, the kindest looks of love, the strongest of
admiration were for her, from both husband and wife; the son approached
her with a cheerful eagerness which marked her as his peculiar object,
and at dinner she found him seated by her—and, as she firmly believed,
not without some dexterity on his side. I’ll lay my life that he meant nothing farther; indeed,
it would be very strange and unreasonable if he did. It was consequently necessary to
name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity; to have
some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by
again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the
present, and prepare for another disappointment. I never saw such a long chin in my life. His
former acquaintance had been numerous; but since he had been in the
militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship
with any of them. Their visits to Mrs. Bragge, an
acquaintance of Mrs. At three-and-twenty to have drawn such a
prize! Mr. It is a great way, you know, from hence to Barton.”

“But she must not go round by London,” cried Marianne, in the same
hurried manner. Hodges, Wright holds her very cheap indeed.—She
promised Wright a receipt, and never sent it.”

“I met William Larkins,” continued Mr. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two
younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin
Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and
sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every
way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them. Just as
your drawings always are, my dear. That I was desirous of believing
her indifferent is certain; but I will venture to say that my
investigations and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or
fears. Bingley,” said Elizabeth, “must disarm reproof.”

“Nothing is more deceitful,” said Darcy, “than the appearance of
humility. In such an exigence my uncle’s advice and
assistance would be everything in the world; he will immediately
comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.”

“Oh! You are more likely to have done harm to yourself, than
good to them, by interference.”

“Emma never thinks of herself, if she can do good to others,” rejoined
Mr. and that’s so dreadful!”

“Never mind, Harriet, I shall not be a poor old maid; and it is poverty
only which makes celibacy contemptible to a generous public! Wickham’s being among them. “For God’s sake tell me, is she out of danger, or is she not?”

“We hope she is.”

He rose up, and walked across the room. Bates’s door
to offer the use of their carriage, but the aunt and niece were to be
brought by the Eltons. Such events are very interesting, but the
suspense of them cannot last long. Jennings. Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,
flirtation, and officers, have been in her head. I am not romantic, you know. I am amused by one part of John’s letter—did you
notice it?—where he says, that my information did not take him wholly
by surprize, that he was rather in expectation of hearing something of
the kind.”

“If I understand your brother, he only means so far as your having some
thoughts of marrying. Miss Bingley saw, or suspected, enough to be jealous; and her great
anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some
assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth. You may be very
sure that if I had, I should have cautioned you accordingly.”

“Me!” cried Harriet, colouring, and astonished. But Elinor—how are _her_ feelings to be described? By that time, it was
beginning to hold up, and I was determined that nothing should stop me
from getting away—and then—only think!—I found he was coming up towards
me too—slowly you know, and as if he did not quite know what to do; and
so he came and spoke, and I answered—and I stood for a minute, feeling
dreadfully, you know, one can’t tell how; and then I took courage, and
said it did not rain, and I must go; and so off I set; and I had not
got three yards from the door, when he came after me, only to say, if I
was going to Hartfield, he thought I had much better go round by Mr. Dashwood was upon the
whole well satisfied; for though her former style of life rendered many
additions to the latter indispensable, yet to add and improve was a
delight to her; and she had at this time ready money enough to supply
all that was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments. Bingley’s attention to her sister, Elizabeth
was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some
interest in the eyes of his friend. what felicity! The immediate advantage to herself was by no means inconsiderable, for
it supplied her with endless jokes against them both. Do help me. She was ready to tell
every thing in her power, but on this subject questions were vain. _She_ could not. For herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him,--proud that
in a cause of compassion and honour he had been able to get the better
of himself. It had always been evident to her that such an
income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in
their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to
their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or
herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance towards
discharging their bills. A mutual silence took place for some time. How little did I think!—The two Abbots and
I ran into the front room and peeped through the blind when we heard he
was going by, and Miss Nash came and scolded us away, and staid to look
through herself; however, she called me back presently, and let me look
too, which was very good-natured. I have no wish to be distinguished; and have
every reason to hope I never shall. They were scarcely ever without some friends staying
with them in the house, and they kept more company of every kind than
any other family in the neighbourhood. We have cleared away all the old thorns that
grew in patches over the brow.”

Elinor kept her concern and her censure to herself; and was very
thankful that Marianne was not present, to share the provocation. The wedding was no distant event, as the parties had only themselves to
please, and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait for; and
when he set out for Bath again, there was a general expectation, which
a certain glance of Mrs. She is the sort of
woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.”

The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news, and
telling again what had been already written; and when it closed,
Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon
Charlotte’s degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding,
and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it
was all done very well. They had sung together once or twice, it appeared, at Weymouth. On ascending the stairs, the Miss Dashwoods found so many people before
them in the room, that there was not a person at liberty to tend to
their orders; and they were obliged to wait. Jennings’s chariot, which she knew had not been ordered
till one. Pray, pray let me
hear it.”

“You shall; and, to be brief, when I quitted Barton last October,—but
this will give you no idea—I must go farther back. Their affection
was always to subside into friendship. Weston,” said Mr. Bennet,” said she, “it is very hard to think that Charlotte
Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that _I_ should be forced
to make way for _her_, and live to see her take my place in it!”

“My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. What a letter
the man writes!”

“I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him.”

“Well, there _is_ feeling here.—He does seem to have suffered in
finding her ill.—Certainly, I can have no doubt of his being fond of
her. He spoke of it as a certain
event, of which the time alone could be undecided. Cole’s
should be finished there—that the same party should be collected, and
the same musician engaged, met with the readiest acquiescence. Weston is
rather an easy, cheerful-tempered man, than a man of strong feelings;
he takes things as he finds them, and makes enjoyment of them somehow
or other, depending, I suspect, much more upon what is called society
for his comforts, that is, upon the power of eating and drinking, and
playing whist with his neighbours five times a week, than upon family
affection, or any thing that home affords.”

Emma could not like what bordered on a reflection on Mr. Woodhouse
soon followed; and the necessity of exertion made him composed. Jennings
exultingly. Frank Churchill and Miss
Woodhouse flirted together excessively.” They were laying themselves
open to that very phrase—and to having it sent off in a letter to Maple
Grove by one lady, to Ireland by another. Her health seemed for the moment completely deranged—appetite
quite gone—and though there were no absolutely alarming symptoms,
nothing touching the pulmonary complaint, which was the standing
apprehension of the family, Mr. He looked serious as usual; and,
she thought, more as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as
she had seen him at Pemberley. But she felt that it was so, long, long before she
could feel his influence less. Much better employed talking to the young ladies. I beg your pardon. But
this conciliation was not granted; for though she often threw out
expressions of pity for her sister to Elinor, and more than once dropt
a reflection on the inconstancy of beaux before Marianne, no effect was
produced, but a look of indifference from the former, or of disgust in
the latter. For the present, adieu. Ferrars than himself.”

“And so _you_ are forced to do it. His air, his coat,
his horse. CHAPTER XL. “Well, I believe, if you will excuse me, Mr. But
about the middle of the day she gets hungry, and there is nothing she
likes so well as these baked apples, and they are extremely wholesome,
for I took the opportunity the other day of asking Mr. And where are your sisters? Mrs. have you heard from my uncle?”

“Yes, I have had a letter from him by express.”

“Well, and what news does it bring--good or bad?”

“What is there of good to be expected?” said he, taking the letter from
his pocket; “but perhaps you would like to read it.”

Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Collins she thought
with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Do as you please.”

Mr. Martin, no wife in the case; she did suspect danger to her poor little
friend from all this hospitality and kindness, and that, if she were
not taken care of, she might be required to sink herself forever. I have no such injuries to resent. The party did not supply much conversation. Dear Miss Woodhouse, he would be thirty years old!”

“Well, and that is as early as most men can afford to marry, who are
not born to an independence. Elinor, who did justice to Mrs. “Did not you think him sadly out of spirits?” repeated Lucy. “My dear father, I congratulate you.”

“And have you answered the letter?” said Elizabeth. Do not you pity me?”

Emma spoke her pity so very kindly, that with a sudden accession of gay
thought, he cried,

“Ah! Elizabeth walked on in quest
of the only face whose features would be known to her. Not one of them had the power of removal, or of
effecting any material change of society. Lucy came very shortly to claim Elinor’s compassion on
being unable to see Edward, though he had arrived in town with Mr. Mr. As all
conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the
room. Weston to dine with us, while Isabella is
here.”

“Yes, my dear, if there is time.—But—(in a very depressed tone)—she is
coming for only one week. extorting
from him occasional questions and remarks. Dashwood can spare you both for
so long a time together!”

“Long a time, indeed!” interposed Mrs. She
might talk on; and if he wanted to say any thing himself, he would only
talk louder, and drown her voice. They will then join his regiment,
unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs. It is very difficult for the prosperous to be
humble. Weston, capital in her country-dances, was seated, and beginning an
irresistible waltz; and Frank Churchill, coming up with most becoming
gallantry to Emma, had secured her hand, and led her up to the top. Knightley could not tell. And now, Elinor, what have you to say?”

“Nothing, for you have anticipated my answer.”

“Then you would have told me, that it might or might not have happened. I _must_ have employment and society. Besides, it will not much signify what
one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they
are going in a fortnight.”

“Are they, indeed?” cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction. “I have been most highly gratified, indeed, my dear sir; such very
superior dancing is not often seen. Elinor was very earnest in her application to her mother, relating all
that had passed, her suspicions of Willoughby’s inconstancy, urging her
by every plea of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an account
of her real situation with respect to him. I have spent so many happy months there! The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was the
picture of a young gentleman, the son of her late master’s steward, who
had been brought up by him at his own expense. Domestic happiness is out of the question. Who had been at
pains to give Harriet notions of self-consequence but herself?—Who but
herself had taught her, that she was to elevate herself if possible,
and that her claims were great to a high worldly establishment?—If
Harriet, from being humble, were grown vain, it was her doing too. In time, of course, Mr. why cannot I speak to him?”

“Pray, pray be composed,” cried Elinor, “and do not betray what you
feel to every body present. Forster, the wife of the colonel of the
regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. Martin and
Harriet now are?”

“I am quite sure,” he replied, speaking very distinctly, “that he told
me she had accepted him; and that there was no obscurity, nothing
doubtful, in the words he used; and I think I can give you a proof that
it must be so. But still she had inclination enough for shewing people
again how delightfully Mr. I do not mean to talk to you of what my feelings have
been for him, but what they are _now_. He was afraid not even Miss Woodhouse”—he
stopt a moment—“or Miss Smith could inspire him.”

The very next day however produced some proof of inspiration. But Emma, in her own mind, determined that he _did_ know what he
was talking about, and that he shewed a very amiable inclination to
settle early in life, and to marry, from worthy motives. Bennet, are not they?”

[Illustration: Cheerful prognostics]

“They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.”

“But if you have got them to-day,” said Elizabeth, “my mother’s purpose
will be answered.”

She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses
were engaged; Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her
mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad
day. We returned unwounded, and the
meeting, therefore, never got abroad.”

Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this; but to a man and a
soldier she presumed not to censure it. I must think your statement by no means fair. “Good gracious! Her objections to Mr. But it was then too
late, and with a countenance meaning to be open, she sat down again and
talked of the weather. Every body’s attention
was called, and almost every body was concerned.—Colonel Brandon rose
up and went to them without knowing what he did.—Mrs. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them till
they were joined by Mr. But from the severity of that blame which was last
night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope
to be in future secured, when the following account of my actions and
their motives has been read. Elton and the Martins. You will not regard being tired. He knows where we live. Sir William, how can you tell such a story? As an
old friend, you will allow me to hope, Miss Fairfax, that ten years
hence you may have as many concentrated objects as I have.”

It was kindly said, and very far from giving offence. Oh! There he had not always the patience
that could have been wished. VOLUME III




CHAPTER I


A very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy Emma as to the
nature of her agitation on hearing this news of Frank Churchill. A charming place, undoubtedly. My father supported him at school, and
afterwards at Cambridge; most important assistance, as his own father,
always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have been unable to
give him a gentleman’s education. He had done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard
nor esteem. Donavan was sent for;
and luckily he happened to just come in from Harley Street, so he
stepped over directly, and as soon as ever he saw the child, he said
just as we did, that it was nothing in the world but the red gum, and
then Charlotte was easy. You can’t think how much I
longed to see you! Collins, was convinced that
they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself
and her daughters out of the house as soon as Mr. The room at
the Crown was to witness it;—but it would be better than a common
meeting in a crowd. But it was not to be. She was before me, constantly before me, as I travelled, in the same
look and hue.”

A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded. and Mrs. Its windows,
opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody
hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts
which were scattered over the intermediate lawn. Perhaps it is about Miss Williams and, by the bye, I dare
say it is, because he looked so conscious when I mentioned her. “I am not sorry to see you alone,” he replied, “for I have a good deal
to say to you. A man always
imagines a woman to be ready for any body who asks her.”

“Nonsense! When Mr. are
you never to hear yourself praised!—Then you must be no friend of mine;
for those who will accept of my love and esteem, must submit to my open
commendation.”

The nature of her commendation, in the present case, however, happened
to be particularly ill-suited to the feelings of two thirds of her
auditors, and was so very unexhilarating to Edward, that he very soon
got up to go away. Smallridge, a most
delightful woman!—A style of living almost equal to Maple Grove—and as
to the children, except the little Sucklings and little Bragges, there
are not such elegant sweet children anywhere. If she is ill I should be sorry to do her injustice; but
there are some traits in her character which make it difficult for me
to speak of her with the forbearance I could wish. Jane was by no means better. Six years hence, if he could meet with a good sort
of young woman in the same rank as his own, with a little money, it
might be very desirable.”

“Six years hence! Mrs. Weston’s temper. “She will think Frank ought to ask her.”

Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim her former promise; and
boasted himself an engaged man, which his father looked his most
perfect approbation of—and it then appeared that Mrs. They had not been long seated and
composed when Mr. But now it is all too late. A Miss Hawkins of Bath. Mrs. I shall now go away and live in
dread of one event.”

“What do you mean?”

“Your sister’s marriage.”

“You are very wrong. Weston calling on every body to begin dancing again. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was
found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to,
a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towards the
two eldest. I am sure Mr. Weston appeared at a little distance from the
window, evidently on the watch. Had not my own feelings decided
against you, had they been indifferent, or had they even been
favourable, do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept
the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the
happiness of a most beloved sister?”

As she pronounced these words, Mr. What is it, that you
mean by it?”

“I mean,” said he, with serious energy, “if I can, to make you hate me
one degree less than you do _now_. You
must remember it now?”

“Upon my word I never heard of it till this moment.”

“Never! Martin may be the richest
of the two, but he is undoubtedly her inferior as to rank in
society.—The sphere in which she moves is much above his.—It would be a
degradation.”

“A degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance, to be married to a
respectable, intelligent gentleman-farmer!”

“As to the circumstances of her birth, though in a legal sense she may
be called Nobody, it will not hold in common sense. Mrs. Weston’s fears were justified in the arrival of a letter of
excuse. She meant to take her in the carriage, leave her at the
Abbey Mill, while she drove a little farther, and call for her again so
soon, as to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerous
recurrences to the past, and give the most decided proof of what degree
of intimacy was chosen for the future. Weston’s stable, papa. “Ah!—well—to be sure. Elton, I have heard so much of her. Till you chose to turn her into a
friend, her mind had no distaste for her own set, nor any ambition
beyond it. I know,
indeed, that he is so, and, as such, wish him well. Some letters had passed between her
and her brother, in consequence of Marianne’s illness; and in the first
of John’s, there had been this sentence:—“We know nothing of our
unfortunate Edward, and can make no enquiries on so prohibited a
subject, but conclude him to be still at Oxford;” which was all the
intelligence of Edward afforded her by the correspondence, for his name
was not even mentioned in any of the succeeding letters. Pratt?”

“I think I have,” replied Elinor, with an exertion of spirits, which
increased with her increase of emotion. Philips began to express her concern thereupon, he assured
her, with much earnest gravity, that it was not of the least importance;
that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged she would not
make herself uneasy. If attention, in
future, could do away the past, she might hope to be forgiven. What will Wickham say? “Lizzy,” said he, “I was going to look for you: come into my room.”

She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell
her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner
connected with the letter he held. I thought
we never should have got into the coach. But she was always right. Of
this she was perfectly unaware: to her he was only the man who made
himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough
to dance with. It was enough for her to feel. In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for half an
hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of the
opportunity of making any inquiries which Jane was equally eager to
satisfy. I should like to see Emma in love, and in some
doubt of a return; it would do her good. Her carefulness in guarding her sister from ever hearing Willoughby’s
name mentioned, was not thrown away. Poor dear Jane was talking of it just now.—‘You
must go,’ said she. Perhaps _she_ is full young to be much
in company. Martin, I imagine, has his fortune
entirely to make—cannot be at all beforehand with the world. The Miss Dashwoods had now been rather more than two months in town,
and Marianne’s impatience to be gone increased every day. Any place would do of about three or four
     hundred a year; but, however, do not speak to Mr. Knightley to do the sort of thing—to do any thing
really good-natured, useful, considerate, or benevolent. Mrs. Where shall you change horses? If I could but see you as happy! “Why, to own the truth,” cried Miss Bates, who had been trying in vain
to be heard the last two minutes, “if I must speak on this subject,
there is no denying that Mr. And, by the bye,
can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion?—Pray be
sincere, Knightley. Within half an hour
it was known all over Highbury. Another hour or two’s snow
can hardly make the road impassable; and we are two carriages; if one
is blown over in the bleak part of the common field there will be the
other at hand. He was as generous, she
doubted not, as the most generous of his sex. Darcy than he has
received; and I am sorry to say that by his account, as well as his
sister’s, Mr. If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_
affections, because I had no money, what occasion could there be for
making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally
poor?”

“But there seems indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her so
soon after this event.”

“A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant
decorums which other people may observe. Do you sit where you like? Jennings wrote to tell the wonderful
tale, to vent her honest indignation against the jilting girl, and pour
forth her compassion towards poor Mr. If she suspected _any_
prepossession elsewhere, it could not be in _that_ quarter. Elton, speaking louder, said,

“Yes, here I am, my good friend; and here I have been so long, that
anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise; but, the truth
is, that I am waiting for my lord and master. Three daughters married! Willoughby, that will open his character farther. Enscombe is in Yorkshire?”

“Yes, they are about one hundred and ninety miles from London, a
considerable journey.”

“Yes, upon my word, very considerable. Ferrars was satisfied. A
thousand inquiries sprung up from her heart, but she dared not urge
one. Mr. A more reasonable
cause might be found in the dependent situation which forbade the
indulgence of his affection. Well, my dear, I wish you joy of it again and
again; and if ever there was a happy couple in the world, I think I
shall soon know where to look for them.”

“You mean to go to Delaford after them I suppose,” said Elinor, with a
faint smile. But
nothing can be done; I know very well that nothing can be done. Poor Mr. After dinner she would try her piano-forte. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his
side by preparations for the reception of his bride, as he had reason to
hope, that shortly after his next return into Hertfordshire, the day
would be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. Adopt
her, educate her.”

“And make her like myself.”

“By all means, if you can.”

“Very well. “Ah, well! I will say that for you.”

He seemed hardly to hear her; he was thoughtful—and in a manner which
shewed him not pleased, soon afterwards said,

“So you have been settling that I should marry Jane Fairfax?”

“No indeed I have not. It was in the ‘Times’ and the ‘Courier,’ I know;
though it was not put in as it ought to be. Knightley might be preserved from sinking deeper in aggression towards
Mr. “No great variety of faces for you,” said Emma. Weston are at the Crown at this moment,” said Frank
Churchill, “examining the capabilities of the house. I cannot express my own abhorrence of myself. Elton, I understand—certainly as to dancing—Mrs. Would to Heaven that anything could be either said or done on my part,
that might offer consolation to such distress! “I am sure,” said she, “I cried for two days together when Colonel
Miller’s regiment went away. Mrs. Elton had first entered not two years ago, to make his way as
he could, without any alliances but in trade, or any thing to recommend
him to notice but his situation and his civility.—But he had fancied
her in love with him; that evidently must have been his dependence; and
after raving a little about the seeming incongruity of gentle manners
and a conceited head, Emma was obliged in common honesty to stop and
admit that her own behaviour to him had been so complaisant and
obliging, so full of courtesy and attention, as (supposing her real
motive unperceived) might warrant a man of ordinary observation and
delicacy, like Mr. The Enscombe family were not in town quite so
soon as had been imagined, but he was at Highbury very soon afterwards. Campbell think she does quite right, just what they should
recommend; and indeed they particularly _wish_ her to try her native
air, as she has not been quite so well as usual lately.”

“I am concerned to hear of it. Marianne was silent; it was impossible for her to say what she did not
feel, however trivial the occasion; and upon Elinor therefore the whole
task of telling lies when politeness required it, always fell. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed,
which certainly was not seldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on
Charlotte. She believed the regard to be mutual; but she
required greater certainty of it to make Marianne’s conviction of their
attachment agreeable to her. He carved and ate and praised with delighted alacrity;
and every dish was commended first by him, and then by Sir William, who
was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law said, in a
manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear. Emma thought first of herself, and then of
Harriet. Mrs. Where shall we see a better daughter, or a kinder
sister, or a truer friend? Weston. Darcy might have been doing to forward her
sister’s match--which she had feared to encourage, as an exertion of
goodness too great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be
just, from the pain of obligation--were proved beyond their greatest
extent to be true! [Illustration]

Mrs. Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out who
were the parents, but Harriet could not tell. She wished with all her heart
Combe Magna was not so near Cleveland; but it did not signify, for it
was a great deal too far off to visit; she hated him so much that she
was resolved never to mention his name again, and she should tell
everybody she saw, how good-for-nothing he was.”

The rest of Mrs. She was born to
discover the falsehood of her own opinions, and to counteract, by her
conduct, her most favourite maxims. Cox’s family,
the lawyer of Highbury. His visit
he would now defer; but they had a very interesting parley about what
could be done and should be done. Could it be an impartial one? _My_ girls were nothing to her, and yet they used to be foolish
enough; but as for Miss Marianne, she is quite an altered creature. You have shewn that you can dance, and you know we are
not really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper.”

“Brother and sister! It was not likely, however, that any
body should have equalled her in the date of the plan, as it had
entered her brain during the very first evening of Harriet’s coming to
Hartfield. They
would see, he said, only one gentleman there besides himself; a
particular friend who was staying at the park, but who was neither very
young nor very gay. She danced four
dances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house,
and has since dined in company with him four times. There was a
seriousness in Harriet’s manner which prepared her, quite as much as
her words, for something more than ordinary. I speak nothing but the truth. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,
when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a
visitor. ‘Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss
Woodhouse followed. She would not acknowledge that it was with
any view of making a match for her, hereafter, with either of
Isabella’s sons; but she was convinced that a daughter would suit both
father and mother best. It is so delightful that you should live at the
cottage! Weston was quite mistaken in that surmise. Jennings might be expected to be. CHAPTER XXVIII. I am so happy. She was the instigator. Elton for what was called an
_introduction_—of her going into public under the auspices of a friend
of Mrs. A large party secures its
own amusement. Bennet was likely to live; and
Sir William gave it as his decided opinion, that whenever Mr. As a magistrate, he had
generally some point of law to consult John about, or, at least, some
curious anecdote to give; and as a farmer, as keeping in hand the
home-farm at Donwell, he had to tell what every field was to bear next
year, and to give all such local information as could not fail of being
interesting to a brother whose home it had equally been the longest
part of his life, and whose attachments were strong. We
will follow them to Hartfield. Emma’s going
away directly after tea might be giving offence. As the door
opened she was heard,

“So very obliging of you!—No rain at all. I cannot really change for the better. I was repulsed
indeed! Weston must be between forty and fifty.”

“Which makes his good manners the more valuable. But Mrs. Bennet, “that is exactly what I
could most wish for. She was full of jokes and laughter, and before dinner
was over had said many witty things on the subject of lovers and
husbands; hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in Sussex,
and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not. Collins, moreover, adds, ‘I am truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia’s sad
business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their
living together before the marriage took place should be so generally
known. The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice; they took
themselves off in a hurry. I hope you find a chair. Bennet on having so fine a family of
daughters, said he had heard much of their beauty, but that, in this
instance, fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not
doubt her seeing them all in due time well disposed of in marriage. I pity, though I
     cannot help blaming, her. And what claims has Lydia, what attractions has she
beyond youth, health, and good humour, that could make him for her sake
forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well? “Elinor, I must go home. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his
friend’s inclination; or why, upon his own judgment alone, he was to
determine and direct in what manner that friend was to be happy. Consider from how partial a
quarter your information came. After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set
out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming,
“Is not this nice? But Georgiana would not join her. Churchill
was better than could be expected; and their first removal, on the
departure of the funeral for Yorkshire, was to be to the house of a
very old friend in Windsor, to whom Mr. Even
before Miss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess,
the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed her to impose any
restraint; and the shadow of authority being now long passed away, they
had been living together as friend and friend very mutually attached,
and Emma doing just what she liked; highly esteeming Miss Taylor’s
judgment, but directed chiefly by her own. In that case, nothing could be more
pitiable or more honourable than the sacrifices she had resolved on. Whilst wandering on in this
slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth’s astonishment was
quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. John Dashwood. my dear Fanny; her life cannot be worth half that
purchase.”

“Certainly not; but if you observe, people always live for ever when
there is an annuity to be paid them; and she is very stout and healthy,
and hardly forty. He is an excellent young man, both as son
and brother. It was enough to secure his good
opinion; for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl could want to
make her mind as captivating as her person. After much thinking, she could determine on nothing better, than
Harriet’s returning the visit; but in a way that, if they had
understanding, should convince them that it was to be only a formal
acquaintance. But there are other points
to be considered besides his inclination. if you were
to see what a headache she has. He was very much pleased
with Randalls, thought it a most admirably arranged house, would hardly
allow it even to be very small, admired the situation, the walk to
Highbury, Highbury itself, Hartfield still more, and professed himself
to have always felt the sort of interest in the country which none but
one’s _own_ country gives, and the greatest curiosity to visit it. Only think, Mama, how it is improved since I was here last! Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to
eat, drink, and play at cards, who, when he found her prefer a plain
dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her. Well, (smiling,) I hope it may be allowed that if compassion
has produced exertion and relief to the sufferers, it has done all that
is truly important. Do not run away with such an idea.”

“Is not she? It will not do. “There were some very strong objections against the lady,” were Colonel
Fitzwilliam’s words; and these strong objections probably were, her
having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in
business in London. I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their
side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing, if she had
been well looked after. Weston has
some little claim. and Mrs. Emma
longed to know what Frank’s first opinion of Mrs. They were alike too, in a general benevolence of temper,
and a strong habit of regard for every old acquaintance. Jennings attacked her one evening at the park,
to give the name of the young man who was Elinor’s particular
favourite, which had been long a matter of great curiosity to her,
Margaret answered by looking at her sister, and saying, “I must not
tell, may I, Elinor?”

This of course made every body laugh; and Elinor tried to laugh too. For God’s sake, say no more of
his partners. at three-and-twenty to be the king of his company—the great man—the
practised politician, who is to read every body’s character, and make
every body’s talents conduce to the display of his own superiority; to
be dispensing his flatteries around, that he may make all appear like
fools compared with himself! It was very little less. “Was he handsome?”—“She believed he
was reckoned a very fine young man.” “Was he agreeable?”—“He was
generally thought so.” “Did he appear a sensible young man; a young man
of information?”—“At a watering-place, or in a common London
acquaintance, it was difficult to decide on such points. Bennet, who had calculated on
her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
would exactly finish Jane’s week, could not bring herself to receive
them with pleasure before. The Miss
Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. The pleasantness of the morning had induced
him to walk forward, and leave his horses to meet him by another road,
a mile or two beyond Highbury—and happening to have borrowed a pair of
scissors the night before of Miss Bates, and to have forgotten to
restore them, he had been obliged to stop at her door, and go in for a
few minutes: he was therefore later than he had intended; and being on
foot, was unseen by the whole party till almost close to them. There was no denying
that those brothers had penetration. It was all
pride and insolence. Long before I was enough recovered to talk, I was
perfectly able to reflect. Amongst the objects in the scene, they soon discovered an animated one;
it was a man on horseback riding towards them. Darcy,
as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever
sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing
her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them. and Mrs. A circumstance rather unlucky occurred. Goddard’s to attend a sick child,
and Miss Nash had seen him, and he had told Miss Nash, that as he was
coming back yesterday from Clayton Park, he had met Mr. Jennings was in the habit of spending a large portion of
the year at the houses of her children and friends, she was not without
a settled habitation of her own. Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the affair about once every day,
or twice, if the subject occurred very often, by saying, “It is very
shocking, indeed!” and by the means of this continual though gentle
vent, was able not only to see the Miss Dashwoods from the first
without the smallest emotion, but very soon to see them without
recollecting a word of the matter; and having thus supported the
dignity of her own sex, and spoken her decided censure of what was
wrong in the other, she thought herself at liberty to attend to the
interest of her own assemblies, and therefore determined (though rather
against the opinion of Sir John) that as Mrs. One half of the world cannot
understand the pleasures of the other.”

Later in the morning, and just as the girls were going to separate in
preparation for the regular four o’clock dinner, the hero of this
inimitable charade walked in again. Bennet, “I am quite delighted with him. “Where is your sister?” said he hastily, as he opened the door. “Is there no chance of my seeing you and your sisters in town this
winter, Miss Dashwood?”

“I am afraid, none at all.”

“Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time than I should wish to
do.”

To Marianne, he merely bowed and said nothing. The Colonel, too!—perhaps scarcely less
an object of pity!—Oh!—how slow was the progress of time which yet kept
them in ignorance! For Marianne, however, in spite of his incivility in surviving her
loss, he always retained that decided regard which interested him in
every thing that befell her, and made her his secret standard of
perfection in woman; and many a rising beauty would be slighted by him
in after-days as bearing no comparison with Mrs. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.”

“To be sure, Lizzy,” said her aunt, “he is not so handsome as Wickham;
or rather he has not Wickham’s countenance, for his features are
perfectly good. “You forget how much she belongs to
Highbury. They have each their
advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.”

“Ay, that is because you have the right disposition. When Mr. I am very glad you
have somebody who thinks of those things. You shan’t talk me out of my
satisfaction. Let me return your congratulations.—I assure you that I
have heard the news with the warmest interest and satisfaction.—He is a
man whom I cannot presume to praise.”

Emma was delighted, and only wanted him to go on in the same style; but
his mind was the next moment in his own concerns and with his own Jane,
and his next words were,

“Did you ever see such a skin?—such smoothness! my uncle!” cried Jane, “what do you mean, sir?”

“I mean that no man in his proper senses would marry Lydia on so slight
a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am
gone.”

“That is very true,” said Elizabeth; “though it had not occurred to me
before. From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and
were indebted to Mr. She knew that his mother neither behaved
to him so as to make his home comfortable at present, nor to give him
any assurance that he might form a home for himself, without strictly
attending to her views for his aggrandizement. Still farther in confirmation of her hopes, in the interval of
Marianne’s turning from one lesson to another, some words of the
Colonel’s inevitably reached her ear, in which he seemed to be
apologising for the badness of his house. Bingley
never stirs without him.”

“So much the better. Knightley’s
marrying Jane Fairfax, or any body else, which at the time she had
wholly imputed to the amiable solicitude of the sister and the aunt. I should not attempt it, if it were to be the means of
inconvenience to the Highbury people, but if you call to mind exactly
the present line of the path.... We shall be at
Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some balls, and I
will take care to get good partners for them all.”

“I should like it beyond anything!” said her mother. Such a sad loss to our party
to-day!”

“Dreadful!—Exactly so, indeed.—She will be missed every moment.”

This was very proper; the sigh which accompanied it was really
estimable; but it should have lasted longer. In a firm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began. In one point she was fully
justified. Mrs. he must and shall come back,” cried Sir John. For the world would
not she have seemed to threaten me.—Imagine the shock; imagine how,
till I had actually detected my own blunder, I raved at the blunders of
the post.—What was to be done?—One thing only.—I must speak to my
uncle. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him. Woodhouse was silent from consternation; but every body else
had something to say; every body was either surprized or not surprized,
and had some question to ask, or some comfort to offer. Elton
had not his equal for beauty or agreeableness.”




CHAPTER IX


Mr. Weston was the
most used of the two to yield; till a little bustle in the room shewed
them that tea was over, and the instrument in preparation;—and at the
same moment Mr. But whether she would do for a
lady’s maid, I am sure I can’t tell. Elinor for a few moments remained silent. Dixon, one may guess what one chuses.”

“There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them all—” he
began rather quickly, but checking himself, added, “however, it is
impossible for me to say on what terms they really were—how it might
all be behind the scenes. He did not omit being sometimes directly before Miss
Smith, or speaking to those who were close to her.—Emma saw it. As the day of his arrival drew near,--

“I begin to be sorry that he comes at all,” said Jane to her sister. Poor Perry is bilious, and he
has not time to take care of himself—he tells me he has not time to
take care of himself—which is very sad—but he is always wanted all
round the country. Were it possible, she must say it must
be Edward. Weston would be
disappointed. Collins’s letter had done away much of her ill-will,
and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which
astonished her husband and daughters. It was a great satisfaction to us
to hear it, I assure you.”

Elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother; and was not sorry to
be spared the necessity of answering him, by the arrival of Mrs. “Hunters!” repeated Edward—“but why must you have hunters? It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Come, what is your competence?”

“About eighteen hundred or two thousand a year; not more than _that_.”

Elinor laughed. They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and
every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer
reach of the woods to which they were approaching: but it was some time
before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered
mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed
to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she
distinguished no part of the scene. Ferrars, and neither she nor your
brother or sister suspected a word of the matter: till this very
morning, poor Nancy, who, you know, is a well-meaning creature, but no
conjurer, popt it all out. “My dear, dear
aunt,” she rapturously cried, “what delight! or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected? I have not known him long indeed, but I am much
better acquainted with him, than I am with any other creature in the
world, except yourself and mama. I see
nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr. Short was the time, however, in which that fear
could affect her, for within half an hour after Willoughby’s leaving
the house, she was again called down stairs by the sound of another
carriage.—Eager to save her mother from every unnecessary moment’s
horrible suspense, she ran immediately into the hall, and reached the
outward door just in time to receive and support her as she entered it. and so imperfectly
have I discharged my trust!”

“Is she still in town?”

“No; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in, for I found her near
her delivery, I removed her and her child into the country, and there
she remains.”

Recollecting, soon afterwards, that he was probably dividing Elinor
from her sister, he put an end to his visit, receiving from her again
the same grateful acknowledgments, and leaving her full of compassion
and esteem for him. It is very
hard indeed that she should not have a little pleasure, because Miss
Dashwood does not wish it. Is not it a good exchange?—You consent—I hope
you consent?”

“It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to, if Mr. The little she said was
all in lamentation of this inevitable delay; though Elinor tried to
raise her spirits, and make her believe, as she _then_ really believed
herself, that it would be a very short one. His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but
     a little more liveliness, and _that_, if he marry _prudently_, his
     wife may teach him. There was no time for farther remark or explanation. Mr. The certainty of
meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that
might not unreasonably have alarmed her. You shall not, for the sake of one individual,
change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade
yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of
danger security for happiness.”

“I must think your language too strong in speaking of both,” replied
Jane; “and I hope you will be convinced of it, by seeing them happy
together. How very
differently we feel!—Not think they will do each other any good! Elton. His quick
eye she detected again and again glancing towards them with a happy
expression; and even, when he might have determined not to look, she
was confident that he was often listening. Collins. “Oh, Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed
above them all? Indeed they are very delightful apples, and Mrs. If you want any farther
explanation,” continued he, smiling, “they are paid for it. Seldom, very seldom, does complete truth belong to any human
disclosure; seldom can it happen that something is not a little
disguised, or a little mistaken; but where, as in this case, though the
conduct is mistaken, the feelings are not, it may not be very
material.—Mr. Elton was appealed
to.—“Was not it astonishingly like?—She could really almost fancy
herself at Maple Grove.”

“And the staircase—You know, as I came in, I observed how very like the
staircase was; placed exactly in the same part of the house. Palmer’s acting so simply, with good abilities, and at the strange
unsuitableness which often existed between husband and wife, before Sir
John’s and Mrs. But one or the
other, if not both of them, I must have. It was an
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should
very strenuously have opposed it. The sitting began; and Harriet, smiling and blushing, and afraid of not
keeping her attitude and countenance, presented a very sweet mixture of
youthful expression to the steady eyes of the artist. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything
was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency, of which
Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. They walked towards the Lucases’, because Kitty wished to call upon
Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern,
when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Elton. It will be
all to one a better match for your sister. But though I was always doing wrong things,
they were very bad wrong things, and such as did me no service.—It
would have been a much better transgression had I broken the bond of
secrecy and told you every thing.”

“It is not now worth a regret,” said Emma. But it is very likely that he
_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as
soon as he comes.”

“I see no occasion for that. Gray’s shop. Lord! His footsteps were heard along the gravel
path; in a moment he was in the passage, and in another he was before
them. Why, he is down here every year.”

“And what sort of a young man is he?”

“As good a kind of fellow as ever lived, I assure you. To Marianne it had all the distinguishing
tenderness which a lover’s heart could give, and to the rest of the
family it was the affectionate attention of a son and a brother. In what respect? [Illustration]

Mr. She was not less pleased
another day with the manner in which he seconded a sudden wish of hers,
to have Harriet’s picture. “I would not on any
account trifle with her affectionate solicitude, or allow her to hear it
from anyone but myself. If, therefore, she
actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to
force her into accepting me, because, if liable to such defects of
temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity.”

“Sir, you quite misunderstand me,” said Mrs. People _did_ say,
you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope
it is not true. Does she live near you, sir?”

“The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane
from Rosings Park, her Ladyship’s residence.”

“I think you said she was a widow, sir? Gardiner abused her stupidity. She still screamed and sobbed lustily, kicked her two
brothers for offering to touch her, and all their united soothings were
ineffectual till Lady Middleton luckily remembering that in a scene of
similar distress last week, some apricot marmalade had been
successfully applied for a bruised temple, the same remedy was eagerly
proposed for this unfortunate scratch, and a slight intermission of
screams in the young lady on hearing it, gave them reason to hope that
it would not be rejected. But the case is altered now. “‘Smallridge!’—What does this mean? She was convinced that
she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they
should meet. You are very kind. I wonder how she speaks of the Coles—what
she calls them! But whether he were entirely
free from peculiar attachment—whether there were no actual
preference—remained a little longer doubtful. Ferrars comfortable
as a bachelor; it cannot enable him to marry. Emma was directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeable; the
conviction was strengthened by what followed. But no
sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she had
hardly a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered
uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. Frank Churchill having
resolved to go home directly, without waiting at all, and his horse
seeming to have got a cold, Tom had been sent off immediately for the
Crown chaise, and the ostler had stood out and seen it pass by, the boy
going a good pace, and driving very steady. However, I recollected afterwards, that if he _had_ been prevented
going, the wedding need not be put off, for Mr. To be sure, it would have been more for the advantage of
conversation, had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the
happiest alternative, been secluded from the world in some distant
farm-house. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse; but
she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and
cold was their manner whenever they did. Ferrars, were on the best terms
imaginable with the Dashwoods; and setting aside the jealousies and
ill-will continually subsisting between Fanny and Lucy, in which their
husbands of course took a part, as well as the frequent domestic
disagreements between Robert and Lucy themselves, nothing could exceed
the harmony in which they all lived together. Miss Bingley said something of his never
     returning to Netherfield again, of giving up the house, but not
     with any certainty. Collins attending them to point out its beauties,
and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth
looking at in the summer. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mrs. there is nothing like staying at home for real comfort. Emma said it would be awkward; Mrs. If I were you, whatever I did should be done at my
own discretion entirely. “It is indeed for Mrs. You do not suppose that I have ever felt much. One accompaniment to her song took her
agreeably by surprize—a second, slightly but correctly taken by Frank
Churchill. Marianne got up the next morning at her usual time; to every inquiry
replied that she was better, and tried to prove herself so, by engaging
in her accustomary employments. Weston, do not take to
match-making. Considering the very particular friendship
between her and Mrs. To her own heart it was a delightful affair,
to her imagination it was even a ridiculous one, but to her reason, her
judgment, it was completely a puzzle. And we all know that Wickham has every
charm of person and address that can captivate a woman.”

“But you see that Jane,” said her aunt, “does not think so ill of
Wickham, as to believe him capable of the attempt.”

“Of whom does Jane ever think ill? Ungracious girl! And then I have made a little purchase within
this half year; East Kingham Farm, you must remember the place, where
old Gibson used to live. “How very ill Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she
was so thoughtful. In one moment her imagination placed before her
a letter from Willoughby, full of tenderness and contrition,
explanatory of all that had passed, satisfactory, convincing; and
instantly followed by Willoughby himself, rushing eagerly into the room
to inforce, at her feet, by the eloquence of his eyes, the assurances
of his letter. And her neighbours at
Lucas Lodge, therefore, (for through their communication with the
Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine,) had
only set _that_ down as almost certain and immediate which _she_ had
looked forward to as possible at some future time. They could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr. Her affections had been continually
fluctuating, but never without an object. “She must have some motive, more powerful than appears, for refusing
this invitation,” was Emma’s conclusion. I never passed within
view of it without admiring its situation, and grieving that no one
should live in it. Have you heard from Mrs. They all paint tables, cover screens, and
net purses. She gained on them, however,
involuntarily: the child’s pace was quick, and theirs rather slow; and
she was the more concerned at it, from their being evidently in a
conversation which interested them. Perry,” said he, in a voice of very strong displeasure, “would do
as well to keep his opinion till it is asked for. “I am sure there is not on _his_. Jennings, “and how did it end?”

“I am sorry to say, ma’am, in a most unhappy rupture:—Edward is
dismissed for ever from his mother’s notice. Ferrars, as either Robert or Fanny; and while Edward was never
cordially forgiven for having once intended to marry her, and Elinor,
though superior to her in fortune and birth, was spoken of as an
intruder, _she_ was in every thing considered, and always openly
acknowledged, to be a favourite child. It was evident that he was
unhappy; she wished it were equally evident that he still distinguished
her by the same affection which once she had felt no doubt of
inspiring; but hitherto the continuance of his preference seemed very
uncertain; and the reservedness of his manner towards her contradicted
one moment what a more animated look had intimated the preceding one. I behaved shamefully. Bennet, one day, “what is your opinion _now_ of
this sad business of Jane’s? Louisa and I were agreeing that we
should not have known her again.”

However little Mr. Let no name ever pass our lips. She wanted me to nurse my cold by staying at home to-day, and
yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catching an ulcerated sore
throat herself. Dashwood’s assistance,
supported her into the other room. “No, no, you must not; you shall not, indeed.”

It was done however. “Not at all.”

“You are ungrateful.”

“Ungrateful!—What do you mean?” Then changing from a frown to a
smile—“No, do not tell me—I do not want to know what you mean.—Where is
my father?—When are we to begin dancing?”

Emma could hardly understand him; he seemed in an odd humour. Are you acquainted
with Mr. Elton for a while made her rather
sorry to find, when they had all taken their places, that he was close
to her. Her sorrow,
her disappointment, her deep regret, when I told her that I was obliged
to leave Devonshire so immediately—I never shall forget it—united too
with such reliance, such confidence in me!—Oh, God!—what a hard-hearted
rascal I was!”

They were both silent for a few moments. Emma waited the result with impatience, but not without strong
hopes. When the particulars of this conversation were repeated by Miss
Dashwood to her sister, as they very soon were, the effect on her was
not entirely such as the former had hoped to see. “When _my_ eyes were opened to his real character, oh! Knightley came again,
she desired him to read it. Had the late Mr. You are not
very gay yourself.”

“Why should you think so!” replied he, with a sigh. He had been too
much expected by the best judges, for surprize—but there was great joy. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Philips be placed
in the gallery at Pemberley. Gardiner could not but be
deeply affected. “Better than she ever used to do?—You see how my father and Mrs. But you look grave, Marianne;
do you disapprove your sister’s choice?”

“Perhaps,” said Marianne, “I may consider it with some surprise. Bennet to return to Longbourn as soon as he could, to
the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only
security for her husband’s not being killed in a duel. You must have done well. “Do you like London?” said Edward, willing to say any thing that might
introduce another subject. CHAPTER V


“I do not know what your opinion may be, Mrs. Mr. Mr. Their arrival
seemed to afford him real satisfaction, and their comfort to be an
object of real solicitude to him. [Illustration]

It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out
together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire;
and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. She almost ran out of the room, and as
soon as the door was closed, burst into tears of joy, which at first
she thought would never cease. Philips’s manners and politeness. Weston; “an
engagement—a positive engagement.—What will you say, Emma—what will any
body say, when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax are
engaged;—nay, that they have been long engaged!”

Emma even jumped with surprize;—and, horror-struck, exclaimed,

“Jane Fairfax!—Good God! My aunt
always sends me off when she is shopping. Bingley’s being there; and as
to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must soon
cease to regard it in the enjoyment of his. Elinor’s compassion for him increased, as she had reason to suspect
that the misery of disappointed love had already been known to him. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often
doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it
seemed nothing but absence of mind. [Illustration]

Not all that Mrs. No, Marianne. These feelings rapidly restored his comfort, while Mrs. Let us flatter ourselves that _I_ may be the survivor.”

This was not very consoling to Mrs. Her manners
were attaching, and soon banished his reserve. Robert Martin, of Abbey-Mill Farm. Dashwood would have interrupted her instantly with soothing
tenderness, had not Elinor, who really wished to hear her sister’s
unbiased opinion, by an eager sign, engaged her silence. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say; and so, passing through
Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. W.”


[_To Mrs. Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared; but if
this reflected at all upon his impatience, his sorrowful look and total
want of spirits when he did come might redeem him. Knightley suspected in Frank
Churchill the determination of catching her eye—he seemed watching her
intently—in vain, however, if it were so—Jane passed between them into
the hall, and looked at neither. yes; there is nothing in that. They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and,
while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of
meeting its owner returned. “This was really his,” said Harriet.—“Do not you remember one
morning?—no, I dare say you do not. Weston.—So it proved;—for
when happily released from Mr. At first there
seemed danger of Lydia’s engrossing him entirely, for she was a most
determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets,
she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets
and exclaiming after prizes, to have attention for anyone in particular. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to
walk home. That’s a consideration indeed.—But John, as to what I was telling
you of my idea of moving the path to Langham, of turning it more to the
right that it may not cut through the home meadows, I cannot conceive
any difficulty. He professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friend—her fair,
lovely, amiable friend. But Edward had no turn for
great men or barouches. The Coles were
very respectable in their way, but they ought to be taught that it was
not for them to arrange the terms on which the superior families would
visit them. To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go. The
hand writing of her mother, never till then unwelcome, was before her;
and, in the acuteness of the disappointment which followed such an
ecstasy of more than hope, she felt as if, till that instant, she had
never suffered. And, besides, I must give you a hint, Frank;
any want of attention to her _here_ should be carefully avoided. I should like to know
how many of all my numerous engagements take place without your being
of the party; and why I am to be supposed in danger of wanting leisure
to attend to the little boys. As you will do it,
it will indeed, to use your own words, be an exquisite possession.”

“But I am afraid, Mr. Jennings’s entreaty was
warmly seconded by Mr. There is such
perfect good-temper and good-will in Mr. I am no young lady on her preferment. How could I be so silly as to wish it! But then you know, how
should I guess such a thing? Goddard, Emma could not have allowed her to leave the house. And I protest,
if I had any money to spare, I should buy a little land and build one
myself, within a short distance of London, where I might drive myself
down at any time, and collect a few friends about me, and be happy. Somehow or other I never happened to be staying at Barton while he was
at Allenham. They were so deserving, that a
_little_ higher should have been enough: but as it was, how could she
have done otherwise?—Impossible!—She could not repent. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his
letter which promises well. Wallis
does them full justice—only we do not have them baked more than twice,
and Mr. Elton’s civilities for her. There is but one part of my conduct, in the whole
affair, on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it is that I
condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from him
your sister’s being in town. Again
I demand an explanation of it. [Illustration]

The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. And I am sure Lucy would have done just the same by
me; for a year or two back, when Martha Sharpe and I had so many
secrets together, she never made any bones of hiding in a closet, or
behind a chimney-board, on purpose to hear what we said.”

Elinor tried to talk of something else; but Miss Steele could not be
kept beyond a couple of minutes, from what was uppermost in her mind. Elton
from her thoughts. The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious
attention. I
always had a value for him. (giggling
as she spoke) I’d lay my life I know what my cousins will say, when
they hear of it. Miss Bates, let Emma help you to a
_little_ bit of tart—a _very_ little bit. Elizabeth preserved as steady a
silence as either Mrs. It is very
good advice, and it shall have a better fate than your advice has often
found; for it shall be attended to.”

“Mrs. Woodhouse was enjoying a
full flow of happy regrets and fearful affection with his daughter. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had
given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a good
deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in
retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected
prosperity. Woodhouse had been
talked into what was necessary, told that he understood, and the papers
swept away;—“particularly pleasant. It does not do him justice, to be
sure, but yet I think you cannot be deceived as to the person it was
drew for.—I have had it above these three years.”

She put it into her hands as she spoke; and when Elinor saw the
painting, whatever other doubts her fear of a too hasty decision, or
her wish of detecting falsehood might suffer to linger in her mind, she
could have none of its being Edward’s face. To Marianne, indeed, the meeting between Edward
and her sister was but a continuation of that unaccountable coldness
which she had often observed at Norland in their mutual behaviour. So altered—so faded—worn down by acute suffering of
every kind! Good gracious! Goddard. “I cannot rate her beauty as you do,” said he; “but she is a pretty
little creature, and I am inclined to think very well of her
disposition. for of course you must know, as you have been in
Devonshire so lately.’”

“And what did the Colonel say?”

“Oh—he did not say much; but he looked as if he knew it to be true, so
from that moment I set it down as certain. I know how much
you dislike him.”

“You know nothing of the matter. “We have heard Sir John admire it excessively,” said Lucy, who seemed
to think some apology necessary for the freedom of her sister. The only way of proving it, however,
will be to turn to our maps. I have no
pleasure in seeing my friends, unless I can believe myself fit to be
seen.”

The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room, Emma found herself
obliged to turn from him for a few minutes, and listen to Mr. So, I made free to wish her joy.”

“Was Mr. Weston, she had been seeing
nothing, except that he had found a seat by Miss Fairfax, followed Mr. She expected every
moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room: she wished, she
feared, that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether
she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. Jennings, and she
was fearful that her question had implied much more curiosity on the
subject than she had ever felt. A
piece of paper was found on the table this morning—(dropt, we suppose,
by a fairy)—containing a very pretty charade, and we have just copied
it in.”

She read it to him, just as he liked to have any thing read, slowly and
distinctly, and two or three times over, with explanations of every
part as she proceeded—and he was very much pleased, and, as she had
foreseen, especially struck with the complimentary conclusion. From
what can it proceed? At such a distance as _that_, you know, things are strangely
misrepresented.”

“Certainly,” he replied, biting his lips. Emma must do Harriet good: and by supplying her with
a new object of interest, Harriet may be said to do Emma good. James’s had made him
courteous. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and
the exertion would soon have been nothing. It is a most
uncommon complexion, with her dark eye-lashes and hair—a most
distinguishing complexion! Darcy! The room in which the ladies sat was backwards. Here is my
sketch of the fourth, who was a baby. It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. “I should be undeserving of the confidence you have honoured me with,
if I felt no desire for its continuance, or no farther curiosity on its
subject. He was always agreeable and
obliging, and speaking pleasantly of every body. and Mrs. She was
pondering, in the meanwhile, upon the possibility, without seeming very
rude, of making her escape from Jane Fairfax’s letter, and had almost
resolved on hurrying away directly under some slight excuse, when Miss
Bates turned to her again and seized her attention. We seemed to understand each
other. Walk home!—you are prettily shod for walking home,
I dare say. Their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enough to make a very
creditable appearance in Mr. This was agreed to; and Mrs. came on into Hertfordshire,
anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet
and Hatfield, but without any success,--no such people had been seen to
pass through. She was disappointed, and angry
with herself for being so. It was a night of almost equal suffering to both. Excepting inequality of fortune,
and perhaps a little disparity of age, I can see nothing unsuitable.”

“But Mr. Elton would not
stand up with me; and when there was no other partner in the room. But the expression is hardly admissible, Mrs. Knightley, with most ready interposition—“very
true. He had, in fact, been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence. My sisters may write to _me_. She was in gay spirits, and would have
prolonged the conversation, wanting to hear the particulars of his
suspicions, every look described, and all the wheres and hows of a
circumstance which highly entertained her: but his gaiety did not meet
hers. I
called her a distant relation; but I am well aware that I have in
general been suspected of a much nearer connection with her. Elton?” said Emma in a whisper. She longed to know what at that moment was passing in his mind; in
what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything,
she was still dear to him. You and I shall not want
opportunities. Mr. Poor Lydia’s
situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she
had need to be thankful. She must
see more of him to understand his ways; at present she only felt they
were agreeable. His
aunt could not bear to have him leave her. Jane was beyond competition her
favourite child. Smith your only friend? Emma saw symptoms of it immediately
in the expression of her face; and while paying her own compliments to
Mrs. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained
in any doubt of your sister’s sentiments. It was the very event to engage those
who talk most, the young and the low; and all the youth and servants in
the place were soon in the happiness of frightful news. When you and the Middletons are gone, we shall go on so quietly and
happily together with our books and our music! I hardly know how Mr. “Could I expect it to be otherwise?” said she. “Mr. Mrs. Now, seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and
dependence? At his and Mrs. He had abundantly earned the privilege of intimate
discussion of her sister’s disappointment, by the friendly zeal with
which he had endeavoured to soften it, and they always conversed with
confidence. “She is so fond of Mrs. It is very plain that he considers the
good fortune of the engagement as all on my side, but that he is not
without hope of my growing, in time, as worthy of your affection, as
you think me already. Weston, you have prevailed, I
hope, and these ladies will oblige us.”

Emma would be “very happy to wait on Mrs. Weston; but, undoubtedly he could know very little of the matter. “I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. I knew him to be a very good sort of man, and I
thought well of his daughter—better than she deserved, for, with a most
obstinate and ill-judged secrecy, she would tell nothing, would give no
clue, though she certainly knew all. He was
considering her as the source of all the happiness they offered. They might all
have hoped to rise by Harriet’s acquaintance: and besides, what was the
value of Harriet’s description?—So easily pleased—so little
discerning;—what signified her praise? I have
been seeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure. Jennings; but after this narration of what
really passed between Colonel Brandon and Elinor, while they stood at
the window, the gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting, may
perhaps appear in general, not less reasonably excited, nor less
properly worded than if it had arisen from an offer of marriage. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with
somebody else, and offered to introduce him to any young lady in the
room. On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost
all, took place. The whole party before
them, indeed, excited a lively attention. Weston to herself, ushered in the letter from Frank to
Mrs. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very
good luck, I may meet with another Mr. I hear you have a charming collection of new ribbons from town. At present I will say nothing about it.”

“You are quite right. When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were
mentioned, in tones of such mortifying, yet merited, reproach, her sense
of shame was severe. Suckling nor me
had ever any patience with them; and we used sometimes to say very
cutting things! That is _ship_;—plain as it can be.—Now for the cream. Hodges, or to
inspect anything—”

“I have not the least wish for it, I thank you.”

“Well—but if any difficulties should arise, my housekeeper is extremely
clever.”

“I will answer for it, that mine thinks herself full as clever, and
would spurn any body’s assistance.”

“I wish we had a donkey. can she be ignorant of what you
and Jane seem so well to understand?”

“Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. What a blessing, that she
never had any children! A letter arrived from Mr. Elton as she seemed to do. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to
_her_. A thousand a-year is a great deal for a mother to give away, to
make over for ever; but Mrs. Bingley returned Mr. Jennings to be Lady Middleton’s mother. Mr. She talked with
a great deal of reason, and at least equal affection—but she had too
much to urge for Emma’s attention; it was soon gone to Brunswick Square
or to Donwell; she forgot to attempt to listen; and when Mrs. She went—she had driven once unsuccessfully to the door, but had not
been into the house since the morning after Box Hill, when poor Jane
had been in such distress as had filled her with compassion, though all
the worst of her sufferings had been unsuspected.—The fear of being
still unwelcome, determined her, though assured of their being at home,
to wait in the passage, and send up her name.—She heard Patty
announcing it; but no such bustle succeeded as poor Miss Bates had
before made so happily intelligible.—No; she heard nothing but the
instant reply of, “Beg her to walk up;”—and a moment afterwards she was
met on the stairs by Jane herself, coming eagerly forward, as if no
other reception of her were felt sufficient.—Emma had never seen her
look so well, so lovely, so engaging. Nothing should separate her from her father. “I should never have said Mrs. Weston;
and I must say, that I think him greatly to blame. “There was a strong
expectation of his coming soon after the marriage, but it ended in
nothing; and I have not heard him mentioned lately.”

“But you should tell them of the letter, my dear,” said her father. She had not been able to speak; and,
on entering the carriage, sunk back for a moment overcome—then
reproaching herself for having taken no leave, making no
acknowledgment, parting in apparent sullenness, she looked out with
voice and hand eager to shew a difference; but it was just too late. Weston. I will not say quite all. He coloured, and stammered out an unintelligible reply. you would not
earn a very good livelihood as a working silversmith at this rate.”

“I have not been working uninterruptedly,” he replied, “I have been
assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her instrument stand steadily,
it was not quite firm; an unevenness in the floor, I believe. “For me!” cried Marianne, stepping hastily forward. In that case he would return no more. A lady always does.—She said enough to shew
there need not be despair—and to invite him to say more himself. He has also _brotherly_ pride,
which, with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and
careful guardian of his sister; and you will hear him generally cried up
as the most attentive and best of brothers.”

“What sort of a girl is Miss Darcy?”

He shook his head. Weston on his entrance, with a smiling countenance,
exclaiming,

“A very pretty trick you have been playing me, upon my word! Weston would not be blind to folly,
though in his own son; but he is very likely to have a more yielding,
complying, mild disposition than would suit your notions of man’s
perfection. “Was there no one else in the carriage?”

“No, ma’am, only they two.”

“Do you know where they came from?”

“They come straight from town, as Miss Lucy—Mrs. Knightley’s going to London had been an unexpected blow. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and
had left her four thousand pounds. But yet—he is not the kind of
young man—there is something wanting—his figure is not striking; it has
none of that grace which I should expect in the man who could seriously
attach my sister. It would be such a delight to have her
picture!”

“Let me entreat you,” cried Mr. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned
back. “Poor creatures! Only look at her. Well, time does
fly indeed!—and my memory is very bad. Suckling is extremely fond of exploring. They were certainly no friends to
his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have
chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. You are not
aware of what you are doing. The slightest mention of anything relative to Willoughby
overpowered her in an instant; and though her family were most
anxiously attentive to her comfort, it was impossible for them, if they
spoke at all, to keep clear of every subject which her feelings
connected with him. Maria thought speaking out of the question,
and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire. “It is too
much a matter of fact, but here it is.—What two letters of the alphabet
are there, that express perfection?”

“What two letters!—express perfection! She believed he had
been drinking too much of Mr. Confess, Marianne, is not there something interesting to
you in the flushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?”

Soon after this, upon Elinor’s leaving the room, “Mama,” said Marianne,
“I have an alarm on the subject of illness which I cannot conceal from
you. Heaven forbid! Believe me,” and Elinor spoke
it with the truest sincerity, “nothing could be farther from my
intention than to give you such an idea. “I love Willoughby,
sincerely love him; and suspicion of his integrity cannot be more
painful to yourself than to me. The touch seemed immediate. At the end of another day or two, Marianne growing visibly stronger
every twelve hours, Mrs. Harris, or if _he_ could
not come, for some other advice, when the former—but not till after
five o’clock—arrived. I shall talk about it to him; he will settle for
me; he will help me out of all my difficulties.’—And to this day, I do
believe, she knows not whether it was his present or his daughter’s.”

Now Emma was obliged to think of the pianoforte; and the remembrance of
all her former fanciful and unfair conjectures was so little pleasing,
that she soon allowed herself to believe her visit had been long
enough; and, with a repetition of every thing that she could venture to
say of the good wishes which she really felt, took leave. Nichols was in
Meryton last night: I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose
to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certainly true. An excellent charade
indeed! The disguise, equivocation, mystery, so hateful to her to
practise, might soon be over. Oh! But, my
dear, is not this rather out of character? Their sisters and Mrs. And then not to find him at home! He knows of my
     being in town, I am certain, from something she said herself; and
     yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she wanted to
     persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. But you, (turning
to Mr. You might
not give Emma such a complete education as your powers would seem to
promise; but you were receiving a very good education from _her_, on
the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own will, and
doing as you were bid; and if Weston had asked me to recommend him a
wife, I should certainly have named Miss Taylor.”

“Thank you. I remembered what I
used to do myself. Mr. Mr. Weston sees
no objection to it, provided you are satisfied. Emma had feelings, less of curiosity than of pride or propriety, to
make her resolve on not being the last to pay her respects; and she
made a point of Harriet’s going with her, that the worst of the
business might be gone through as soon as possible. Knightley, with energy. Goddard’s a few days afterwards. “Where does he come from? The sisters, on hearing
this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their
indifference towards Jane, when not immediately before them, restored
Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her original dislike. Elton cared little about it,
compared with his wife; he only hoped “the young lady’s pride would now
be contented;” and supposed “she had always meant to catch Knightley if
she could;” and, on the point of living at Hartfield, could daringly
exclaim, “Rather he than I!”—But Mrs. that I had never seen her!”

The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly enough for her
thoughts.—She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that had
rushed on her within the last few hours. CHAPTER III


Emma could not forgive her;—but as neither provocation nor resentment
were discerned by Mr. When she told Marianne what she had done, however, her first reply was
not very auspicious. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. The paling of Rosings park was their boundary on one side. and this dear parlour in which our acquaintance first
began, and in which so many happy hours have been since spent by us
together, you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance, and
every body would be eager to pass through the room which has hitherto
contained within itself more real accommodation and comfort than any
other apartment of the handsomest dimensions in the world could
possibly afford.”

Mrs. As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting to be so, she made no
scruple of turning her eyes from the grand pianoforte, whenever it
suited her, and unrestrained even by the presence of a harp, and
violoncello, would fix them at pleasure on any other object in the
room. But a day spent in sitting shivering
over the fire with a book in her hand, which she was unable to read, or
in lying, weary and languid, on a sofa, did not speak much in favour of
her amendment; and when, at last, she went early to bed, more and more
indisposed, Colonel Brandon was only astonished at her sister’s
composure, who, though attending and nursing her the whole day, against
Marianne’s inclination, and forcing proper medicines on her at night,
trusted, like Marianne, to the certainty and efficacy of sleep, and
felt no real alarm. Not that you have any reason to regret, my
dear Elinor. I should hold myself guilty of
greater impropriety in accepting a horse from my brother, than from
Willoughby. The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street, and all that reached Elinor
of their influence there, strengthened her expectation of the event. I assure you
mine are very different. _That_ was
the last, last look I ever had of her; the last manner in which she
appeared to me. Oh! CHAPTER VI


Emma could not feel a doubt of having given Harriet’s fancy a proper
direction and raised the gratitude of her young vanity to a very good
purpose, for she found her decidedly more sensible than before of Mr. At last, and tolerably in his usual
tone, he said,

“I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill.—I can suppose,
however, that I may have underrated him. and pray when am I to wish you
joy?”

“That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. Jennings’s. Mr. But (with a smile) you
would be materially benefited in one particular at least—you would know
where to go when you left them.”

“I do assure you,” he replied, “that I have long thought on this point,
as you think now. Elton’s invitations I should
have imagined any thing but inviting.”

“I should not wonder,” said Mrs. Jennings
thought only of his behaviour;—and while his looks of anxious
solicitude on Marianne’s feeling, in her head and throat, the beginning
of a heavy cold, because unexpressed by words, entirely escaped the
latter lady’s observation;—_she_ could discover in them the quick
feelings, and needless alarm of a lover. No one who has ever seen you
together can doubt his affection; Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot: she
is not such a simpleton. She thought it would be an excellent
match; and only too palpably desirable, natural, and probable, for her
to have much merit in planning it. Can it be woman? Palmer; “for we know all
about it, I assure you; and I admire your taste very much, for I think
he is extremely handsome. Elizabeth saw directly that her
father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were
at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often
disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last. The cold, however, was
severe; and by the time the second carriage was in motion, a few flakes
of snow were finding their way down, and the sky had the appearance of
being so overcharged as to want only a milder air to produce a very
white world in a very short time. His appearance was
greatly in his favour: he had all the best parts of beauty, a fine
countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address. The consciousness of having done
amiss, had exposed her to a thousand inquietudes, and made her captious
and irritable to a degree that must have been—that had been—hard for
him to bear. I described and enforced them
earnestly. The sitting was altogether very satisfactory; she was quite enough
pleased with the first day’s sketch to wish to go on. Papa, do you not think it an excellent improvement?”

She was obliged to repeat and explain it, before it was fully
comprehended; and then, being quite new, farther representations were
necessary to make it acceptable. What he might say on the subject a
twelvemonth after, must be referred to the imagination of husbands and
wives. It would be an
excellent match, for _he_ was rich, and _she_ was handsome. From such commendation as this, however, there was not
much to be learned; Elinor well knew that the sweetest girls in the
world were to be met with in every part of England, under every
possible variation of form, face, temper and understanding. He was then, he said, on his way to Longbourn on
purpose to inquire after her. It was known that they were a
little acquainted; but not a syllable of real information could Emma
procure as to what he truly was. I think it is so. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy.”

“And what am I to do on the occasion? Emma was
soon perfectly satisfied of Mr. When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment
she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Elizabeth was surprised, but
said not a word. ‘Not that it was such a very old petticoat either—for still it would
last a great while—and, indeed, she must thankfully say that their
petticoats were all very strong.’”

“For shame, Emma! Bennet, through the assistance of servants,
contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety
and fretfulness on her side be as long as it could. Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of
me. You made a lucky guess; and _that_ is all that can be
said.”

“And have you never known the pleasure and triumph of a lucky guess?—I
pity you.—I thought you cleverer—for, depend upon it a lucky guess is
never merely luck. Smith must be obliged;—and her
business will not detain you from us long I hope.”

He coloured as he replied, “You are very kind, but I have no idea of
returning into Devonshire immediately. But do come in. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved
that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries as to the
absence of the family were unfavourably answered. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and
seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. Cannot you guess what this parcel
holds?” said she, with a conscious look. It was a clear thing he was less in love than he had
been. Knightley, and really able to accept another man from
unbiased inclination, it was not long that she had to suffer from the
recurrence of any such uncertainty. Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment, and every body
had a burst of admiration on first arriving; but in the general amount
of the day there was deficiency. Cox, and Mr. However, I will not disturb you (seeing her preparing to
write.) You know your own concerns best. He
will be so pleased to see my little ones.”

“I hope he will be here to-morrow, for I have a question or two to ask
him about myself of some consequence. Beyond
_that_, had you endeavoured, however reasonably, to abridge _his_
enjoyments, is it not to be feared, that instead of prevailing on
feelings so selfish to consent to it, you would have lessened your own
influence on his heart, and made him regret the connection which had
involved him in such difficulties?”

Marianne’s lips quivered, and she repeated the word “Selfish?” in a
tone that implied—“do you really think him selfish?”

“The whole of his behaviour,” replied Elinor, “from the beginning to
the end of the affair, has been grounded on selfishness. They travelled as expeditiously as possible; and sleeping one night on
the road, reached Longbourn by dinnertime the next day. At last, however, my resolution was taken, and I
had determined, as soon as I could engage her alone, to justify the
attentions I had so invariably paid her, and openly assure her of an
affection which I had already taken such pains to display. Churchills
were also in town; and they were only waiting for November. Palmer joined their entreaties, all seemed equally anxious to avoid a
family party; and the young ladies were obliged to yield. They look upon it
quite as their own, I dare say, whenever that happens.”

“It was a subject which they could not mention before me.”

“No; it would have been strange if they had. Bird and Mrs. “Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is
in love with you and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. And who is there, whatever might be
their former conduct, that she would believe capable of such an attempt,
till it were proved against them? I always say, we are quite blessed in our
neighbours.—My dear sir, if there is one thing my mother loves better
than another, it is pork—a roast loin of pork—”

“As to who, or what Miss Hawkins is, or how long he has been acquainted
with her,” said Emma, “nothing I suppose can be known. Mrs. Palmer’s, it was proposed by the latter that they should all
accompany her to some shops where she had business that morning, to
which Mrs. Of the lady’s sensations they remained a little in
doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was
evident enough. Darcy looked just as he had been
used to look in Hertfordshire, paid his compliments, with his usual
reserve, to Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalfe’s
calling yesterday to thank me? Acquit me here, and
procure for me, when it is allowable, the acquittal and good wishes of
that said Emma Woodhouse, whom I regard with so much brotherly
affection, as to long to have her as deeply and as happily in love as
myself.—Whatever strange things I said or did during that fortnight,
you have now a key to. _We_ were always good friends,
and now we are better.”

“True. Let her marry Robert Martin, and she is safe, respectable,
and happy for ever; but if you encourage her to expect to marry
greatly, and teach her to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of
consequence and large fortune, she may be a parlour-boarder at Mrs. Many a time has Selina said, when she has been going to
Bristol, ‘I really cannot get this girl to move from the house. “He is as fine a fellow,” said Mr. Elton’s going to London produced a fresh occasion
for Emma’s services towards her friend. A
few hours were to have engaged her to me for ever; and I remember how
happy, how gay were my spirits, as I walked from the cottage to
Allenham, satisfied with myself, delighted with every body! Is there a man on earth who could have done it? She was so busy in admiring those soft blue eyes, in talking and
listening, and forming all these schemes in the in-betweens, that the
evening flew away at a very unusual rate; and the supper-table, which
always closed such parties, and for which she had been used to sit and
watch the due time, was all set out and ready, and moved forwards to
the fire, before she was aware. It was by no means his daughter’s wish that the intellects of Highbury
in general should be put under requisition. But remember that the pain of parting from
friends will be felt by every body at times, whatever be their
education or state. Edward’s marriage with Lucy was as firmly
determined on, and the time of its taking place remained as absolutely
uncertain, as she had concluded it would be;—every thing depended,
exactly after her expectation, on his getting that preferment, of
which, at present, there seemed not the smallest chance. They dined with us last.”

“You and I, Sir John,” said Mrs. No such
importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores at
present. Dearest
Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you,
and it cannot be delayed. If your
sentiments are no longer what they were, you will return my notes, and
the lock of my hair which is in your possession. That must be enough for us both.”

This remark was not calculated to make Edward or Elinor more easy, nor
to conciliate the good will of Lucy, who looked up at Marianne with no
very benignant expression. Elton. Were she your equal in situation—but, Emma,
consider how far this is from being the case. Elton, of my connexion with the family, nor of the
treatment I have met with; and, between ourselves, the whole blame of
it is to be laid to her. I believed you to be
wishing, expecting my addresses.”

“My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I assure
you. To all the
objections I have already urged I have still another to add. His eyes were fixed on
Marianne, and, after a silence of some minutes, he said, with a faint
smile, “Your sister, I understand, does not approve of second
attachments.”

“No,” replied Elinor, “her opinions are all romantic.”

“Or rather, as I believe, she considers them impossible to exist.”

“I believe she does. I did not know that I had fixed a day, but as he says I did, I
am going now.”

“And while Mrs. Weston rather hesitating, “if you think
she will be of any use.”

“You will get nothing to the purpose from Miss Bates,” said Emma. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last
Kitty did, she very innocently said, “What is the matter, mamma? And Jane Fairfax, too, of all women!”

“Nay, she has always been a first favourite with him, as you very well
know.”

“But the imprudence of such a match!”

“I am not speaking of its prudence; merely its probability.”

“I see no probability in it, unless you have any better foundation than
what you mention. If he were, he would have done this
differently. I have been a
selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. He came. Knightley’s words dwelt with her. Just like her! Elinor wished very much to ask whether
Willoughby were then in town, but she was afraid of giving him pain by
any enquiry after his rival; and at length, by way of saying something,
she asked if he had been in London ever since she had seen him last. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her
uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their
favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress. E., he must have left a message for you, I am
sure he must.—Not even Knightley could be so very eccentric;—and his
servants forgot it. I should wish it.”

Mr. She had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father
and mother, both of whom had been dead many years. I dearly love a
laugh.”

“Miss Bingley,” said he, “has given me credit for more than can be. There was also a postscript to this
effect:--

“I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if
possible, from some of the young man’s intimates in the regiment,
whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to
know in what part of the town he has now concealed himself. Serious she was, very serious in her thankfulness, and in her
resolutions; and yet there was no preventing a laugh, sometimes in the
very midst of them. Goddard’s for news of her fair
friend, the last thing before he prepared for the happiness of meeting
her again, when he hoped to be able to give a better report; and he
sighed and smiled himself off in a way that left the balance of
approbation much in his favour. But take care of yourself. And
what do you think she said besides? Indeed, Eliza, you will be
as welcome to me as either of them.”

The wedding took place: the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from
the church door, and everybody had as much to say or to hear on the
subject as usual. Much, much
beyond impropriety!—It has sunk him, I cannot say how it has sunk him
in my opinion. Engaged to Mr. _They_ will
take care not to outrun their income. You
understand every thing. They speedily
discovered that their enjoyment of dancing and music was mutual, and
that it arose from a general conformity of judgment in all that related
to either. And you only the second. Where is she?—Oh! They are known to no human
being, I guess, but herself. His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. The carriages
were then ordered; Willoughby’s was first, and Marianne never looked
happier than when she got into it. In half a
minute they were together. “Well, my dear, and did you get there safely?—And how did you find my
worthy old friend and her daughter?—I dare say they must have been very
much obliged to you for coming. “Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?” said Miss Bingley: “will
she be as tall as I am?”

“I think she will. But
still I might not have believed it, for where the mind is perhaps
rather unwilling to be convinced, it will always find something to
support its doubts, if I had not, when the servant let me in today,
accidentally seen a letter in his hand, directed to Mr. When he told me
that it might be many weeks before we met again—his distress—can I ever
forget his distress?”

For a moment or two she could say no more; but when this emotion had
passed away, she added, in a firmer tone,

“Elinor, I have been cruelly used; but not by Willoughby.”

“Dearest Marianne, who but himself? Her
regard was receiving strength by invariable praise of him, and her
regrets kept alive, and feelings irritated by ceaseless repetitions of
Miss Hawkins’s happiness, and continual observation of, how much he
seemed attached!—his air as he walked by the house—the very sitting of
his hat, being all in proof of how much he was in love! Elton, very willing to suppose a particular compliment intended
her by such a hope, smiled most graciously. I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when
he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was
that you should come together. It did not often happen; for Mr. Palmer, travelling more expeditiously with Colonel
Brandon, was to join them at Cleveland soon after their arrival. The
vicious propensities, the want of principle, which he was careful to
guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape the
observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself, and who
had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object of
her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of
accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those
attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and
servants. Weston’s parting words. I am much mistaken if Emma’s
doctrines give any strength of mind, or tend at all to make a girl
adapt herself rationally to the varieties of her situation in
life.—They only give a little polish.”

“I either depend more upon Emma’s good sense than you do, or am more
anxious for her present comfort; for I cannot lament the acquaintance. I am doatingly fond of
music—passionately fond;—and my friends say I am not entirely devoid of
taste; but as to any thing else, upon my honour my performance is
_mediocre_ to the last degree. I am guilty, I confess, of
having often wished you to treat our acquaintance in general with
greater attention; but when have I advised you to adopt their
sentiments or to conform to their judgment in serious matters?”

“You have not been able to bring your sister over to your plan of
general civility,” said Edward to Elinor, “Do you gain no ground?”

“Quite the contrary,” replied Elinor, looking expressively at Marianne. She is reserved, more reserved, I think, than
she used to be—And I love an open temper. Knightley’s going to London; and going so
suddenly; and going on horseback, which she knew would be all very bad;
Emma communicated her news of Jane Fairfax, and her dependence on the
effect was justified; it supplied a very useful check,—interested,
without disturbing him. in every view it
is unaccountable!”

“My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. Martin marries, I wish you
may not be drawn in by your intimacy with the sisters, to be acquainted
with the wife, who will probably be some mere farmer’s daughter,
without education.”

“To be sure. “Worse than I had
supposed. holding out her hand to me, asking me for an
explanation, with those bewitching eyes fixed in such speaking
solicitude on my face! _I_
shall not lose you so soon, and Edward will have greater opportunity of
improving that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must be
so indispensably necessary to your future felicity. Her insipidity was invariable, for even her
spirits were always the same; and though she did not oppose the parties
arranged by her husband, provided every thing were conducted in style
and her two eldest children attended her, she never appeared to receive
more enjoyment from them than she might have experienced in sitting at
home;—and so little did her presence add to the pleasure of the others,
by any share in their conversation, that they were sometimes only
reminded of her being amongst them by her solicitude about her
troublesome boys. Other poultry-yards in the
neighbourhood also suffered.—Pilfering was _housebreaking_ to Mr. Vanity working on a weak head, produces every sort of
mischief. Of the lady, individually, Emma thought very little. The idea of
wanting gratitude and consideration for Miss Woodhouse, whom she really
loved extremely, made her wretched for a while, and when the violence
of grief was comforted away, still remained powerful enough to prompt
to what was right and support her in it very tolerably. The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for
the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be
fairly conjectured from _that_,--though Elizabeth, who was by this time
tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware
that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of
Lydia’s infamy somewhat better. Elinor’s curiosity to see Mrs. Emma, on reaching home, called the housekeeper directly, to an
examination of her stores; and some arrowroot of very superior quality
was speedily despatched to Miss Bates with a most friendly note. Good-bye. But you know they were your own words, that _more_ wonderful
things had happened, matches of _greater_ disparity had taken place
than between Mr. “Well, Miss Dashwood,” said Mrs. Elton is the standard of perfection in
Highbury, both in person and mind.”

“Very true, Miss Woodhouse, so she will. I tell every body of it and so does Charlotte.”

“Indeed, Ma’am,” said Elinor, very seriously, “you are mistaken. He brought all the music to her, and they looked it over together.—Emma
took the opportunity of whispering,

“You speak too plain. She had
resolution enough to pursue her own will in spite of her brother, but
not enough to refrain from unreasonable regrets at that brother’s
unreasonable anger, nor from missing the luxuries of her former home. My business is with you, and only you.”

“With me!”—in the utmost amazement—“well, sir,—be quick—and if you
can—less violent.”

“Sit down, and I will be both.”

She hesitated; she knew not what to do. I felt that she was infinitely dearer to me than any
other woman in the world, and that I was using her infamously. No indeed I am not.”

“There can be no doubt of your being much more engaged with company
than you used to be. I hope you have destroyed the letter. Palmer was several years younger than Lady Middleton, and totally
unlike her in every respect. But ah! It would be a charming introduction for you, who have lived
so secluded a life; and I could immediately secure you some of the best
society in the place. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to
imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and, at
first, was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it
would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk,
she made some slight observation on the dance. What do you think has happened this morning? “It is too small—wants
strength. Elton may talk sentimentally, but he will act rationally. then, said I, I must run across, I am sure Miss Woodhouse will allow me
just to run across and entreat her to come in; my mother will be so
very happy to see her—and now we are such a nice party, she cannot
refuse.—‘Aye, pray do,’ said Mr. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and I
flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. Bennet had very often wished, before this period of his life, that,
instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum, for
the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived
him. “Do you know that you are quite rude?”

“I did not know I contradicted any body in calling your mother
ill-bred.”

“Ay, you may abuse me as you please,” said the good-natured old lady,
“you have taken Charlotte off my hands, and cannot give her back again. It would not be likely to produce that
dejection of mind which frequently attended him. He was giving Harriet information as to modes of
agriculture, etc. But a farmer can need none of my help, and is, therefore, in one sense,
as much above my notice as in every other he is below it.”

“To be sure. You like Mr. And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the
Barnet road.”

“Well, then,--supposing them to be in London--they may be there, though
for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptionable purpose. My nephews and nieces!—I shall often have a niece with me.”

“Do you know Miss Bates’s niece? Her heart was divided between concern
for her sister and resentment against all others. Elizabeth could not but be pleased,
could not but triumph. “Well,”—he replied—“once more good bye. Elton, the subject was so completely past
that any reviving question from her would have been awkward. John Dashwood
to visit her at Barton; and to Edward she gave one with still greater
affection. There are moments when the extent of it seems
doubtful; and till his sentiments are fully known, you cannot wonder at
my wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality, by
believing or calling it more than it is. My illness
has made me think. “I had. Bingley,
who seems good-humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,
be in friendship with such a man? Say ‘No,’ if it is to be said.”—She could really
say nothing.—“You are silent,” he cried, with great animation;
“absolutely silent! “No, it by no means wanted strength—it was not a
large hand, but very clear and certainly strong. His own merits must soon secure it.”

“To judge from the Colonel’s spirits, however, you have not yet made
him equally sanguine.”

“No. Yes, there was something in _that_; I told you so from the
first, you may remember.”

“I _did_ hear, too, that there was a time when sermon-making was not so
palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually
declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business
had been compromised accordingly.”

“You did! While he talked to Isabella, however, Emma found an opportunity of
saying,

“And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any means
certain. Gardiner, meanwhile, having settled his account at the inn, nothing
remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of
the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could
have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn. In short, my dear aunt, I
should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but
since we see, every day, that where there is affection young people are
seldom withheld, by immediate want of fortune, from entering into
engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many
of my fellow-creatures, if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that
it would be wiser to resist? Little more than half a day’s
journey. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely
recollected her interest in the affair; and the very circumstance which
had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth, seemed to have
fixed them on her more and more cheerfully. If I
had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on
him. Dancing with open windows!—I am sure, neither
your father nor Mrs. Frank Churchill.”

“I am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject,” replied
Emma, smiling; “but you do not mean to deny that there was a time—and
not very distant either—when you gave me reason to understand that you
did care about him?”

“Him!—never, never. My dear Emma, your own good sense could
not endure such a puppy when it came to the point.”

“I will say no more about him,” cried Emma, “you turn every thing to
evil. Darcy?”

Elizabeth coloured, and said, “A little.”

“And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma’am?”

“Yes, very handsome.”

“I am sure _I_ know none so handsome; but in the gallery upstairs you
will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. Elizabeth jumped out; and after giving each of them a hasty kiss,
hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running downstairs from
her mother’s apartment, immediately met her. Haggerston has our directions, and
all will be completed in a week. About the middle of the day, Mrs. Woodhouse would have been miserable had his
daughter attempted it, and she was therefore safe from either exciting
or receiving unpleasant and most unsuitable ideas. I am most thankful that the discovery is made
in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to do,
and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. There will be a great
many people talking at once. Something of that nature would be
particularly desirable for _me_, as an inducement to keep me in
practice; for married women, you know—there is a sad story against
them, in general. She answered him in the usual
way; and, after a moment’s pause, added,--

“My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Bennet, in
the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes which the
good-humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour’s visit,
had revived. Goddard’s line, to have Mrs. I knew that Mr. So mild and
ladylike—and with such talents!—I assure you I think she has very
extraordinary talents. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and
nothing to reproach him with. She was generous, amiable, interesting:
she was everything but prudent. I am happier even than Jane; she
only smiles, I laugh. Bingley
and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very
well. The
backgammon-table was placed; but a visitor immediately afterwards
walked in and made it unnecessary. They must be a great loss to _your_ family.”

In Darcy’s presence she dared not mention Wickham’s name: but Elizabeth
instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the
various recollections connected with him gave her a moment’s distress;
but, exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she
presently answered the question in a tolerably disengaged tone. A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to
Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Weston there was nothing to be done; for Harriet every thing. Churchill’s illness, and wanted to know how she was treated; and
as for the ball, it was shocking to have dear Emma disappointed; but
they would all be safer at home. Palmer is excessively pleased with you and your sisters I can tell
you, and you can’t think how disappointed he will be if you don’t come
to Cleveland.—I can’t imagine why you should object to it.”

Elinor was again obliged to decline her invitation; and by changing the
subject, put a stop to her entreaties. We ought to be acquainted with Enscombe, and with Mrs. It is not time or opportunity that is
to determine intimacy;—it is disposition alone. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else. Their powers
of conversation were considerable. Marianne continued to mend every day, and the brilliant cheerfulness of
Mrs. “They would have solicited the honour
earlier, but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-screen from
London, which they hoped might keep Mr. There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth’s mind, a more gentle
sensation towards the original than she had ever felt in the height of
their acquaintance. Cole,’
said I, ‘depend upon it. With the kindest concern he came on to Longbourn, and
broke his apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to his heart. She had a little beauty and a little accomplishment, but
so little judgment that she thought herself coming with superior
knowledge of the world, to enliven and improve a country neighbourhood;
and conceived Miss Hawkins to have held such a place in society as Mrs. “Upon my word,” she cried, “the young man is determined not to lose any
thing for want of asking. Imagine to yourself, my dear Elinor, the delight of a
gallop on some of these downs.”

Most unwilling was she to awaken from such a dream of felicity to
comprehend all the unhappy truths which attended the affair; and for
some time she refused to submit to them. Its banks
were neither formal nor falsely adorned. She was sorry, very sorry. In a few minutes
he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while
pretending to admire her work, said in a whisper, “Go to your father; he
wants you in the library.” She was gone directly. They were three days on their journey, and Marianne’s behaviour as they
travelled was a happy specimen of what future complaisance and
companionableness to Mrs. But poor Harriet was such an engrossing charge! They agreed that Mrs. Elton; a most
valuable, amiable, pleasing young man undoubtedly, and very much in
love with Harriet; but still, he cannot refuse an invitation, he must
dine out wherever he is asked. Besides the Eltons,
it must be the Westons and Mr. it was such an inexpressible obligation!—The very
recollection of it, and all that I felt at the time—when I saw him
coming—his noble look—and my wretchedness before. Mr. Collins; “but if she
is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would
altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who
naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. “And of this place,” thought she, “I might have been mistress! You are very right in supposing how my money would be
spent—some of it, at least—my loose cash would certainly be employed in
improving my collection of music and books.”

“And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in annuities on the
authors or their heirs.”

“No, Edward, I should have something else to do with it.”

“Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on that person who
wrote the ablest defence of your favourite maxim, that no one can ever
be in love more than once in their life—your opinion on that point is
unchanged, I presume?”

“Undoubtedly. If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth’s
change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. Bingley’s conduct to design,”
said Elizabeth; “but, without scheming to do wrong, or to make others
unhappy, there may be error and there may be misery. There were the pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot
by the window. William Cox letting himself in at the
office-door, Mr. She could not help frequently
glancing her eye at Mr. Mr. _I_ only want
to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it. With the fortitude of a devoted novitiate, she
had resolved at one-and-twenty to complete the sacrifice, and retire
from all the pleasures of life, of rational intercourse, equal society,
peace and hope, to penance and mortification for ever. But the
case is this:--we are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and she
is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion
that when there has been _one_ inter-marriage, she may have less trouble
in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I
dare say it would succeed if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But the plan which had arisen on the sacrifice of this, he
trusted his dearest Emma would not find in any respect objectionable;
it was, that he should be received at Hartfield; that so long as her
father’s happiness—in other words, his life—required Hartfield to
continue her home, it should be his likewise. _Robert_ Ferrars—I never saw him in my
life; but,” fixing her eyes upon Elinor, “to his eldest brother.”

What felt Elinor at that moment? Has
he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?”

“Your Ladyship has declared it to be impossible.”

“It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his
reason. Not more than
five couple could be mustered; but the rarity and the suddenness of it
made it very delightful, and she found herself well matched in a
partner. I saw that my own feelings had prepared my
sufferings, and that my want of fortitude under them had almost led me
to the grave. Elton to
have _her_ carriage first, were gladly endured, in the prospect of the
quiet drive home which was to close the very questionable enjoyments of
this day of pleasure. Fortunately he had a younger brother who was
more promising. Bingley will like it”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER II. Dashwood _would_ sit up with her all night; and
Elinor, in compliance with her mother’s entreaty, went to bed. I have a high respect for your nerves. And her mother too,
Mrs. Her intentions were unchanged. What Mr. Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at
all likely to make her more elegant. He imagined, and calmly could he imagine it,
that her extravagance, and consequent distress, had obliged her to
dispose of it for some immediate relief. Darcy bowed. Lucy bit her lip, and looked
angrily at her sister. He could even
listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away
the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all
meeting frequently at St. With a hasty exclamation of Misery, and a sign to her sister not to
follow her, she directly got up and hurried out of the room. Cole, I suppose?”

“Yes, very soon. “Well, well,” said he, “do not make yourself unhappy. She can never be more lost to you than she is
now.”

“But she will be gained by some one else. She heard Miss Bates’s voice, something was to be done in a hurry; the
maid looked frightened and awkward; hoped she would be pleased to wait
a moment, and then ushered her in too soon. Your father thought only of _them_. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her
husband. Elton must compose his
joyous looks, and Mr. He must go somewhere, but
     he did not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live
     on. Risk anything rather than her
displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us
again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home,
and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence.”

“Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such
affectionate attention; and, depend upon it, you will speedily receive
from me a letter of thanks for this as well as for every other mark of
your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. Give me the paper and listen. You know my mother’s ideas as to the
necessity of constant company for her friends. their luxury and ease. I have no doubt of his having, at times, considerable influence; but it
may be perfectly impossible for him to know beforehand _when_ it will
be.”

Emma listened, and then coolly said, “I shall not be satisfied, unless
he comes.”

“He may have a great deal of influence on some points,” continued Mrs. Mr. With a letter in her outstretched hand, and countenance gaily smiling,
from the persuasion of bringing comfort, she entered their room,
saying,

“Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am sure will do you good.”

Marianne heard enough. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle
away like other young men.”

“In what an amiable light does this place him!” thought Elizabeth. I have only to hope that they
may be proportionately short. E., Knightley, Jane, and myself. Her
emotion was such as Mrs. Weston was giving some information about his
son; she heard the words “my son,” and “Frank,” and “my son,” repeated
several times over; and, from a few other half-syllables very much
suspected that he was announcing an early visit from his son; but
before she could quiet Mr. Mrs. Business on Sir John’s part, and a
violent cold on her own, prevented their calling in Berkeley Street. No suspicious flourishes now of
apology or concern; it was the language of real feeling towards Mrs. _They_ only knew how
little he had had to tempt him to be disobedient, and how small was the
consolation, beyond the consciousness of doing right, that could remain
to him in the loss of friends and fortune. Perry is not
gone.” And, after proceeding a few steps, she added—“I stopped you
ungraciously, just now, Mr. Quite a humourist. Every thing in
such suspense and uncertainty; and seeing him so seldom—we can hardly
meet above twice a-year. The perpetual
commendations of the lady either on his hand-writing, or on the evenness
of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern
with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was
exactly in unison with her opinion of each. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have
two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of
the day before, was now high in her good graces. Churchill were not in health
and spirits for going; that they made a point of visiting no fresh
person; and that, though he had his separate engagements, it was not
without difficulty, without considerable address _at_ _times_, that he
could get away, or introduce an acquaintance for a night. Those to her mother contained little else than that
they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers
had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as
made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which
she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a
violent hurry, as Mrs. Emma’s answer was ready at the first word. He very much feared that Miss Fairfax derived
more evil than good from them. At present we have
nothing to guide us. Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet. I have many things to support me. The plan of a
drain, the change of a fence, the felling of a tree, and the
destination of every acre for wheat, turnips, or spring corn, was
entered into with as much equality of interest by John, as his cooler
manners rendered possible; and if his willing brother ever left him any
thing to inquire about, his inquiries even approached a tone of
eagerness. The
younger ones out before the elder are married! My father’s opinion of me does
me the greatest honour; and I should be miserable to forfeit it. No doubt he is a sensible man, and I suppose may have a natural
talent for—thinks strongly and clearly—and when he takes a pen in hand,
his thoughts naturally find proper words. He said much of his earnest desire of
their living in the most sociable terms with his family, and pressed
them so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they were
better settled at home, that, though his entreaties were carried to a
point of perseverance beyond civility, they could not give offence. “I hope,” said he presently, “I have not been severe upon poor Mrs. END OF THE SECOND VOLUME




CHAPTER XXXVII. His air was grave and
stately, and his manners were very formal. “Oh, yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so
accomplished! Knightley I declare!—I must speak to him if possible, just to
thank him. Dear, dear Lizzy. “Oh, Jane! This lesson, she very much feared, they would receive only
from herself; she had little hope of Mr. He
was not exactly what she had expected; less of the man of the world in
some of his notions, less of the spoiled child of fortune, therefore
better than she had expected. Instead of falling a sacrifice to an irresistible
passion, as once she had fondly flattered herself with
expecting,—instead of remaining even for ever with her mother, and
finding her only pleasures in retirement and study, as afterwards in
her more calm and sober judgment she had determined on,—she found
herself at nineteen, submitting to new attachments, entering on new
duties, placed in a new home, a wife, the mistress of a family, and the
patroness of a village. [Illustration]

Mr. “So many clever riddles as there used to be when he was young—he
wondered he could not remember them! He had been some days in town before he was able to
     discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which was
     more than _we_ had; and the consciousness of this was another
     reason for his resolving to follow us. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her Ladyship,
and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during
these visits. “No; he thought it very far from an improvement—a very bad plan—much
worse than the other. Elton, I suppose, has been the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes—”

“Yes, our good Mrs. where, where is my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat
as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing a
moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door, it was
opened by a servant, and Mr. I
hardly ever get a letter.”

“And so you absolutely opened what was directed to her! Now, as we may fairly suppose, he would not
allow much time to pass before he spoke to the lady, and as he does not
appear to have spoken yesterday, it is not unlikely that he should be
at Mrs. Some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence, with only one attempt
on Emma’s side to talk of the weather, but he made no answer. She thought it was time
to make up. Between Barton and Delaford, there was that constant communication
which strong family affection would naturally dictate; and among the
merits and the happiness of Elinor and Marianne, let it not be ranked
as the least considerable, that though sisters, and living almost
within sight of each other, they could live without disagreement
between themselves, or producing coolness between their husbands. There is always a look of
consciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know to be
beneath them. There is my father—another of my father—but the
idea of sitting for his picture made him so nervous, that I could only
take him by stealth; neither of them very like therefore. They set off. And for
my part, I was all in a fright for fear your sister should ask us for
the huswifes she had gave us a day or two before; but, however, nothing
was said about them, and I took care to keep mine out of sight. I once knew a lady who in temper and mind
greatly resembled your sister, who thought and judged like her, but who
from an enforced change—from a series of unfortunate circumstances—”
Here he stopt suddenly; appeared to think that he had said too much,
and by his countenance gave rise to conjectures, which might not
otherwise have entered Elinor’s head. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence. It seemed quite a
shame, especially considering how many houses there are where fine
instruments are absolutely thrown away. I had known the Campbells a
little in town; and at Weymouth we were very much in the same set. Her father composed himself to sleep after
dinner, as usual, and she had then only to sit and think of what she
had lost. “Here is April come!” said she, “I get quite anxious about you. That is too young to settle. They were cheered by the joy of the servants on their
arrival, and each for the sake of the others resolved to appear happy. Dixon! Its effect upon her appears in the immediate resolution it
produced: as soon as she found I was really gone from Randalls, she
closed with the offer of that officious Mrs. “John does not even mention your friend,” said Mr. Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town and
must be absent on the very day. “They have both,” said she, “been deceived, I dare say, in some way or
other, of which we can form no idea. I shall be glad to have the
library to myself as soon as may be.”

Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did
Mrs. “Yes,” he replied, with some embarrassment, “almost ever since; I have
been once or twice at Delaford for a few days, but it has never been in
my power to return to Barton.”

This, and the manner in which it was said, immediately brought back to
her remembrance all the circumstances of his quitting that place, with
the uneasiness and suspicions they had caused to Mrs. “Are you well, my Emma?” was Mrs. You must think wretchedly indeed of Willoughby,
if, after all that has openly passed between them, you can doubt the
nature of the terms on which they are together. Elizabeth silently attended
her. Let Wickham
be your man. Have you finished it? Emma watched the entree
of her own particular little friend; and if she could not exult in her
dignity and grace, she could not only love the blooming sweetness and
the artless manner, but could most heartily rejoice in that light,
cheerful, unsentimental disposition which allowed her so many
alleviations of pleasure, in the midst of the pangs of disappointed
affection. Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain. “Cleveland!”—she cried, with great agitation. “He had seen a
group of old acquaintance in the street as he passed—he had not
stopped, he would not stop for more than a word—but he had the vanity
to think they would be disappointed if he did not call, and much as he
wished to stay longer at Hartfield, he must hurry off.” She had no
doubt as to his being less in love—but neither his agitated spirits,
nor his hurrying away, seemed like a perfect cure; and she was rather
inclined to think it implied a dread of her returning power, and a
discreet resolution of not trusting himself with her long. These were very cheering thoughts; and the sight of a great deal of
snow on the ground did her further service, for any thing was welcome
that might justify their all three being quite asunder at present. It is with great regret that I obey
    your commands in returning the letters with which I have been
    honoured from you, and the lock of hair, which you so obligingly
    bestowed on me. Some people were always cross when they were hot. She blessed the favouring blindness. I have passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse a
conduct which can scarcely be called less than insulting; but though I
have not yet been able to form any reasonable apology for your
behaviour, I am perfectly ready to hear your justification of it. The
preparing and the going abroad in such weather, with the sacrifice of
his children after dinner, were evils, were disagreeables at least,
which Mr. Cole is very bilious. Ferrars
at first reasonably endeavoured to dissuade him from marrying Miss
Dashwood, by every argument in her power;—told him, that in Miss Morton
he would have a woman of higher rank and larger fortune;—and enforced
the assertion, by observing that Miss Morton was the daughter of a
nobleman with thirty thousand pounds, while Miss Dashwood was only the
daughter of a private gentleman with no more than _three;_ but when she
found that, though perfectly admitting the truth of her representation,
he was by no means inclined to be guided by it, she judged it wisest,
from the experience of the past, to submit—and therefore, after such an
ungracious delay as she owed to her own dignity, and as served to
prevent every suspicion of good-will, she issued her decree of consent
to the marriage of Edward and Elinor. Pratt, I think, nay, I am sure, it would never
have happened; for though I left Longstaple with what I thought, at the
time, a most unconquerable preference for his niece, yet had I then had
any pursuit, any object to engage my time and keep me at a distance
from her for a few months, I should very soon have outgrown the fancied
attachment, especially by mixing more with the world, as in such case I
must have done. Good girl! In Edward—she knew not what she saw, nor what she
wished to see;—happy or unhappy,—nothing pleased her; she turned away
her head from every sketch of him. Mr. Elton’s offences, and long, very long,
did they occupy her. Philips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses
at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing
that he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well manage
before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House. “M.D.”


That such letters, so full of affection and confidence, could have been
so answered, Elinor, for Willoughby’s sake, would have been unwilling
to believe. I dare say he will come in
when he knows who is here. He came to
the Abbey two evenings ago, on purpose to consult me about it. My poor
husband! Is not it so?”

“Oh! Weston and Miss Bates met them at the door. Pray, when are they to be married?”

Elinor, though never less disposed to speak than at that moment,
obliged herself to answer such an attack as this, and, therefore,
trying to smile, replied, “And have you really, Ma’am, talked yourself
into a persuasion of my sister’s being engaged to Mr. Weston. Woodhouse was
persuaded to think it a possible thing in preference to a division of
the party. Knightley is
coming too. He
begged to be shewn the house which his father had lived in so long, and
which had been the home of his father’s father; and on recollecting
that an old woman who had nursed him was still living, walked in quest
of her cottage from one end of the street to the other; and though in
some points of pursuit or observation there was no positive merit, they
shewed, altogether, a good-will towards Highbury in general, which must
be very like a merit to those he was with. Mrs. I am much concerned to
    find there was anything in my behaviour last night that did not
    meet your approbation; and though I am quite at a loss to discover
    in what point I could be so unfortunate as to offend you, I entreat
    your forgiveness of what I can assure you to have been perfectly
    unintentional. “He is
always out of humour.”

Elinor was not inclined, after a little observation, to give him credit
for being so genuinely and unaffectedly ill-natured or ill-bred as he
wished to appear. We hear of him for ever at some watering-place or
other. Young women should always be properly
guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. Poor Mr. Jennings immediately preparing to
go, said,—

“Well, my dear, I must be gone before I have had half my talk out. poor Harriet!”

She checked herself, however, and submitted quietly to a little more
praise than she deserved. I have more pleasure in a snug
farm-house than a watch-tower—and a troop of tidy, happy villagers
please me better than the finest banditti in the world.”

Marianne looked with amazement at Edward, with compassion at her
sister. Harriet would have been a better match. Knightley.—“Emma, that I fear is a word—No,
I have no wish—Stay, yes, why should I hesitate?—I have gone too far
already for concealment.—Emma, I accept your offer—Extraordinary as it
may seem, I accept it, and refer myself to you as a friend.—Tell me,
then, have I no chance of ever succeeding?”

He stopped in his earnestness to look the question, and the expression
of his eyes overpowered her. “Yet it is hard,” she sometimes thought, “that this poor man cannot come
to a house, which he has legally hired, without raising all this
speculation! “Emma knows I never flatter her,” said Mr. Such was his own account at
Randall’s. Weston immediately accosted her with,

“How d’ye do?—how d’ye do?—We have been sitting with your father—glad
to see him so well. That
Marianne, fastidious as she was, thoroughly acquainted with Mrs. The sight of
Miss Lucas was odious to her. Mrs. The
housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected.—Very
extraordinary!—And nobody knew at all which way he was gone. Collins welcomed her friend with the
liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with
coming, when she found herself so affectionately received. When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham’s departure, she found little
other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Many circumstances assisted the temptation. When one is in great pain, you know one
cannot feel any blessing quite as it may deserve. Perry might have reason to regret the alteration, but
nobody else could.”

“Sir,” said Mr. Let _our_ first effusions be less
insupportable than those of the generality of travellers.”




[Illustration:

     “At the door”
]




CHAPTER XXVIII. At length she replied:

“Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of him is not in every thing
equal to your sense of his merits. Here, consequently, was an inexhaustible
subject of discourse. Weston and I were quite
agreed in thinking it _very_ like)—only too handsome—too flattering—but
that was a fault on the right side”—after all this, came poor dear
Isabella’s cold approbation of—“Yes, it was a little like—but to be
sure it did not do him justice. Oh, Willoughby, Willoughby, could this be yours! “I shall soon bring him over to Hartfield,” said he, at the conclusion. I suppose there is not a man in such practice
anywhere. He would feel himself in the right; and the declaration—made, of
course, as a man of sense would make it, in a proper manner—would do
him more good, raise him higher, fix his interest stronger with the
people he depended on, than all that a line of shifts and expedients
can ever do. She dared not
relate the other half of Mr. And though the consequent
shock and alarm was very great and much more durable—indeed I believe
it was half an hour before any of us were comfortable again—yet that
was too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety to be
observable. He had not left her long, by no means long enough for her to have the
slightest inclination for thinking of any body else, when a letter was
brought her from Randalls—a very thick letter;—she guessed what it must
contain, and deprecated the necessity of reading it.—She was now in
perfect charity with Frank Churchill; she wanted no explanations, she
wanted only to have her thoughts to herself—and as for understanding
any thing he wrote, she was sure she was incapable of it.—It must be
waded through, however. Elinor made no resistance that was not easily overcome. “It keeps him in good
humour,” said she, “and I am more obliged to you than I can express.”

Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and
that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. By birth she belonged to Highbury: and when at three years old, on
losing her mother, she became the property, the charge, the
consolation, the foundling of her grandmother and aunt, there had
seemed every probability of her being permanently fixed there; of her
being taught only what very limited means could command, and growing up
with no advantages of connexion or improvement, to be engrafted on what
nature had given her in a pleasing person, good understanding, and
warm-hearted, well-meaning relations. I have not been used to submit to any person’s
whims. We are very proud of the children, are not we, papa? She longed to see Mrs. His own enjoyment, or
his own ease, was, in every particular, his ruling principle.”

“It is very true. Weston, to congratulate her, and a very
proper, handsome letter it was. Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed
the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. His principal object must be to discover the
number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of
Saturday. Wickham passed all his youth there, you
know.”

Elizabeth was distressed. Had Edward been intentionally deceiving her? yes, I am quite aware of that. His accompanying them was a double advantage: she felt all the
compliment it offered to herself; and it was most acceptable as an
occasion of introducing him to her father and mother. and Miss Woodhouse, if you please; but I cannot possibly say
‘poor Miss Taylor.’ I have a great regard for you and Emma; but when it
comes to the question of dependence or independence!—At any rate, it
must be better to have only one to please than two.”

“Especially when _one_ of those two is such a fanciful, troublesome
creature!” said Emma playfully. She wanted to hear many particulars of their
engagement repeated again, she wanted more clearly to understand what
Lucy really felt for Edward, whether there were any sincerity in her
declaration of tender regard for him, and she particularly wanted to
convince Lucy, by her readiness to enter on the matter again, and her
calmness in conversing on it, that she was no otherwise interested in
it than as a friend, which she very much feared her involuntary
agitation, in their morning discourse, must have left at least
doubtful. We
were always glad to see him at Hartfield.”

“A new neighbour for us all, Miss Woodhouse!” said Miss Bates,
joyfully; “my mother is so pleased!—she says she cannot bear to have
the poor old Vicarage without a mistress. This was the conclusion of the first series of reflection. “He has made me so happy,” said she, one evening, “by telling me that he
was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! Come, be quick, be quick! I have no pleasure in talking
to undutiful children. so long ago as the 7th of
November, (as I am going to read to you,) and has never been well
since. “As for regret,” said Marianne, “I have done with that, as far as _he_
is concerned. On their first coming into the
country, they had lived in proportion to their income, quietly, keeping
little company, and that little unexpensively; but the last year or two
had brought them a considerable increase of means—the house in town had
yielded greater profits, and fortune in general had smiled on them. “It is charming weather for _them_ indeed,” she continued, as she sat
down to the breakfast table with a happy countenance. So high and so conceited, that there was no enduring
him! Mrs. “This man is almost too gallant to be in love,” thought Emma. I know you will soon call on her; she is living in dread of the visit. Duty,
affection, every thing was disregarded. I tried—but could not frame a sentence. The listeners were amused; and Mrs. Was not she the whole day with you?”

“Come,” said she, “I will tell you something, in return for what you
have told me. Colonel Brandon was now as happy, as all those who best loved him,
believed he deserved to be;—in Marianne he was consoled for every past
affliction;—her regard and her society restored his mind to animation,
and his spirits to cheerfulness; and that Marianne found her own
happiness in forming his, was equally the persuasion and delight of
each observing friend. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at, and
it was rather too early to begin. “She should always send for Perry, if the child
appeared in the slightest degree disordered, were it only for a moment. He hunted and shot, and she
humoured her children; and these were their only resources. Weston, still averting her
eyes, and talking on with eagerness, that Emma might have time to
recover— “You may well be amazed. One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two
elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth,--

“Lizzy, I never gave _you_ an account of my wedding, I believe. If I find him
conversable, I shall be glad of his acquaintance; but if he is only a
chattering coxcomb, he will not occupy much of my time or thoughts.”

“My idea of him is, that he can adapt his conversation to the taste of
every body, and has the power as well as the wish of being universally
agreeable. She was a plain, motherly kind of woman,
who had worked hard in her youth, and now thought herself entitled to
the occasional holiday of a tea-visit; and having formerly owed much to
Mr. Jennings and Mrs. I shall go to the piano-forte;
I have not touched it since it was tuned.” And without farther
ceremony, she turned away and walked to the instrument. Dinner-parties and
evening-parties were made for him and his lady; and invitations flowed
in so fast that she had soon the pleasure of apprehending they were
never to have a disengaged day. _We_
have carriages to fetch and convey her home, and _we_ live in a style
which could not make the addition of Jane Fairfax, at any time, the
least inconvenient.—I should be extremely displeased if Wright were to
send us up such a dinner, as could make me regret having asked _more_
than Jane Fairfax to partake of it. He is generally
thought a fine young man, but do not expect a prodigy. The same warmth of heart, the same eagerness of
fancy and spirits. Weston, “she was energetic. Her pleasure in seeing him was like every
other of her feelings, strong in itself, and strongly spoken. Had not Mrs. [Illustration:

     “Protested he must be entirely mistaken.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER XXIII. He did not
repeat his persuasion of their not marrying, and from _that_ I am
inclined to hope he might have been misunderstood before.”

“And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained a
doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?”

“How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? It was to herself an amusing and a very welcome piece
of news, as proving that Mr. Natural enough!—his own mind full of intrigue,
that he should suspect it in others.—Mystery; Finesse—how they pervert
the understanding! Darcy_, you see, is the man! Mrs. There is no use in
delay. But Jane knows, as well as I do, what
Wickham really is. And a
special licence--you must and shall be married by a special licence. What is to become
of that?—Very true. There had been no real affection either in his language
or manners. We all wish her extremely happy;
and Mrs. They attacked him
in various ways, with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at
last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,
Lady Lucas. If he had come at Christmas he could not have staid three days; I
was always glad he did not come at Christmas; now we are going to have
just the right weather for him, fine, dry, settled weather. That some kind of engagement had subsisted between Willoughby and
Marianne she could not doubt, and that Willoughby was weary of it,
seemed equally clear; for however Marianne might still feed her own
wishes, _she_ could not attribute such behaviour to mistake or
misapprehension of any kind. Miss Nash has put down all the texts he has
ever preached from since he came to Highbury. It was weather which might fairly confine every body at home; and
though she hoped and believed him to be really taking comfort in some
society or other, it was very pleasant to have her father so well
satisfied with his being all alone in his own house, too wise to stir
out; and to hear him say to Mr. Mrs. She
is a monstrous lucky girl to get him, upon my honour; not but that he
is much more lucky in getting her, because she is so very handsome and
agreeable, that nothing can be good enough for her. You were kept waiting at the door—I
was quite ashamed—but somehow there was a little bustle—for it so
happened that we had not heard the knock, and till you were on the
stairs, we did not know any body was coming. Suckling, in income.—However, my
resolution is taken as to noticing Jane Fairfax.—I shall certainly have
her very often at my house, shall introduce her wherever I can, shall
have musical parties to draw out her talents, and shall be constantly
on the watch for an eligible situation. I do not know a more luxurious state, sir, than
sitting at one’s ease to be entertained a whole evening by two such
young women; sometimes with music and sometimes with conversation. His son was sent for as soon as his danger was known, and to him Mr. Woodhouse made us promise to have them done three times—but
Miss Woodhouse will be so good as not to mention it. You shall find me as stubborn as you can be
artful. It is impossible.”

“That’s easily said, and easily felt by you, who have always been your
own master. What would you do yourself?”

“Pardon me,” replied Elinor, startled by the question; “but I can give
you no advice under such circumstances. Darcy it was welcome intelligence: Elizabeth had been at
Netherfield long enough. “I am sorry she is not well—” for Marianne had left the room on
their arrival. Ferrars’s kindness is.”

“Certainly,” said Elinor; “and assisted by her liberality, I hope you
may yet live to be in easy circumstances.”

“Another year or two may do much towards it,” he gravely replied; “but
however there is still a great deal to be done. In Mrs. I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very
     much; and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live
     upon without some help. Perhaps it
would have been as well if he had left it wholly to myself. Mr. She
heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded upstairs. She was roused from her seat and her reflections, by someone’s approach;
and, before she could strike into another path, she was overtaken by
Wickham. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”

As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned
her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax!” exclaimed Emma. “My dear Emma,” said he at last, with earnest kindness, “do you think
you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between the
gentleman and lady we have been speaking of?”

“Between Mr. He had nestled down his head most conveniently. This does not seem much like joy, indeed, in
me—(twinkling away a tear or two)—but it will be very trying for us to
part with her, after having had her so long, and she has a dreadful
headache just now, writing all the morning:—such long letters, you
know, to be written to Colonel Campbell, and Mrs. Goddard, for I really do not think she cares
for any thing but _boiled_ pork: when we dress the leg it will be
another thing. Early, I know, you
had none.”

“I never had the smallest, I assure you.”

“That appears quite wonderful. She was quite amazed
at her own discomposure; but, amongst other causes of disquiet, she
dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in
her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally
suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her. This was astonishing!—She could not have believed it possible that the
taste or the pride of Miss Fairfax could endure such society and
friendship as the Vicarage had to offer. She got up and ran out of the room;
and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to
the dining-parlour. Dashwood looked at Elinor with surprise. If
there had not been so much anger, there would have been desperate
awkwardness; but their straightforward emotions left no room for the
little zigzags of embarrassment. But why should you dislike him?”

“I do not dislike him. He will connect himself well if he can.”

“Will you read the letter?” cried Harriet. And tell my dear
Lydia not to give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me,
for she does not know which are the best warehouses. In the meanwhile, she
resolved against seeing Harriet.—It would do neither of them good, it
would do the subject no good, to be talking of it farther.—She was
resolved not to be convinced, as long as she could doubt, and yet had
no authority for opposing Harriet’s confidence. The whole was tied up for the
benefit of this child, who, in occasional visits with his father and
mother at Norland, had so far gained on the affections of his uncle, by
such attractions as are by no means unusual in children of two or three
years old; an imperfect articulation, an earnest desire of having his
own way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, as to outweigh
all the value of all the attention which, for years, he had received
from his niece and her daughters. And I am sure, by his manner, it was no
compliment. Chuse your
own degree of crossness. Edward Ferrars, it seems, has been engaged above this twelvemonth to my
cousin Lucy!—There’s for you, my dear! CHAPTER XVI. You
need not be afraid of unwholesome preserves here. “No,”—replied Emma—quite confirmed by the depressed manner in which he
still spoke—“I should like to take another turn. Look! She represented to her sister, as forcibly as possible, what she felt on
the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect. My dear Emma, I am longing to talk to
you. A room at an inn was always damp and dangerous;
never properly aired, or fit to be inhabited. Sometimes one
officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions
raised them in her opinion. If she has it now, you have given
it. You
should not have done it, indeed you should not. Yes, indeed, there is every thing in
the world that can make her happy in it. Bingley would be soon down again, and soon dining at
Longbourn; and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration,
that, though he had been invited only to a family dinner, she would take
care to have two full courses. It was my brother Gardiner’s drawing up, too, and I wonder how he came
to make such an awkward business of it. no, indeed; I must protest against any such idea. and Sophia, jealous as the devil on the other
hand, looking all that was—Well, it does not signify; it is over now. Weston’s care. When he was present she had no eyes for any one else. [Illustration]

At five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six
Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. how snug they might
live in such another cottage as yours—or a little bigger—with two
maids, and two men; and I believe I could help them to a housemaid, for
my Betty has a sister out of place, that would fit them exactly.”

Here Mrs. It is as pretty a
letter as ever I saw, and does Lucy’s head and heart great credit.”




CHAPTER XXXIX. She loves piquet, you
know; but when she is gone home, I am afraid you will be sitting up by
yourself, instead of going to bed at your usual time—and the idea of
that would entirely destroy my comfort. This is
not the place for explanations. Nothing can be farther from pleasure than to
be dancing in a crowd—and a crowd in a little room!”

“There is no denying it,” he replied. Thoughtlessness,
want of attention to other people’s feelings, and want of resolution,
will do the business.”

“And do you impute it to either of those?”

“Yes; to the last. You had rather take
evil upon credit than good. Dixon must be very much disappointed. Darcy, who took
her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without
knowing what she did, she accepted him. Elton was in being in the same room at once with the woman he had just
married, the woman he had wanted to marry, and the woman whom he had
been expected to marry, she must allow him to have the right to look as
little wise, and to be as much affectedly, and as little really easy as
could be. Elizabeth
had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did
not appear in the least affected by it. Elton was so hot and tired, that all this wit seemed thrown away. It had not been built many years and was in good repair. Fairfax of the ——regiment of infantry, and Miss
Jane Bates, had had its day of fame and pleasure, hope and interest;
but nothing now remained of it, save the melancholy remembrance of him
dying in action abroad—of his widow sinking under consumption and grief
soon afterwards—and this girl. It has been, it is a most cruel
affliction. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different
lines. [Illustration]

Mr. In town, I believe, he
chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence; and being
now free from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and
dissipation. Miss Darcy, though with a
diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations,
readily obeyed. I assure you the utmost stretch of
public fame would not make me amends for the loss of any happiness in
private life.”

“I merely asked, whether you had known much of Miss Fairfax and her
party at Weymouth.”

“And now that I understand your question, I must pronounce it to be a
very unfair one. You promised me
to _insist_ upon her marrying him.”

“My dear,” replied her husband, “I have two small favours to request. “My dear,” said she, entering, “I have just recollected that I have
some of the finest old Constantia wine in the house that ever was
tasted, so I have brought a glass of it for your sister. “My mother’s deafness is very trifling you see—just nothing at all. I fancy I am
rather a favourite; he took notice of my gown. Wickham’s
     circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to
     be. And to be
better acquainted therefore, Elinor soon found was their inevitable
lot, for as Sir John was entirely on the side of the Miss Steeles,
their party would be too strong for opposition, and that kind of
intimacy must be submitted to, which consists of sitting an hour or two
together in the same room almost every day. Had it taken place only once a year, it
would have been a grievance. The consequence of which was, that Mrs. This proposal of his, this plan of marrying and continuing at
Hartfield—the more she contemplated it, the more pleasing it became. What does he say? Intimacy between Miss
Fairfax and me is quite out of the question. Willoughby, very blamable,” said Elinor, while
her voice, in spite of herself, betrayed her compassionate emotion;
“you ought not to speak in this way, either of Mrs. Dixon’s character, or her own
value for his company, or opinion of the suitableness of the match. In general he was judged, throughout the parishes
of Donwell and Highbury, with great candour; liberal allowances were
made for the little excesses of such a handsome young man—one who
smiled so often and bowed so well; but there was one spirit among them
not to be softened, from its power of censure, by bows or smiles—Mr. Mr. Knightley grew angry. There was
little sympathy to be spared for any body else. I had reason to believe myself secure
of my present wife, if I chose to address her, and I persuaded myself
to think that nothing else in common prudence remained for me to do. _I_ should be
ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.”




[Illustration:

“When Colonel Miller’s regiment went away”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER XLI. But even this encouragement failed, for he
would go; and Lucy, who would have outstaid him, had his visit lasted
two hours, soon afterwards went away. He had been detained by a
temporary increase of illness in her; a nervous seizure, which had
lasted some hours—and he had quite given up every thought of coming,
till very late;—and had he known how hot a ride he should have, and how
late, with all his hurry, he must be, he believed he should not have
come at all. While he stood, as if meaning to go, but not going—her father
began his inquiries. As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following
manner:--

“You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my
journey hither. But it will not do. This is not
the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his
wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true
philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given. I give you notice that as I find your son,
so I shall judge of him.—I am no flatterer.”

Mr. Elton had retreated into the card-room, looking (Emma trusted) very
foolish. Fortunately, however, it did cease. Whenever you are transplanted, like me, Miss Woodhouse, you will
understand how very delightful it is to meet with any thing at all like
what one has left behind. Was it
impossible?—No.—Harriet undoubtedly was greatly his inferior in
understanding; but he had been very much struck with the loveliness of
her face and the warm simplicity of her manner; and all the
probabilities of circumstance and connexion were in her favour.—For
Harriet, it would be advantageous and delightful indeed. It was there our acquaintance begun, for my sister and me was
often staying with my uncle, and it was there our engagement was
formed, though not till a year after he had quitted as a pupil; but he
was almost always with us afterwards. Mr. Darcy had been staying there. Actually to discover that Mr. What Elinor said in reply she
could not distinguish, but judged from the motion of her lips, that she
did not think _that_ any material objection; and Mrs. As they passed into other rooms, these objects were
taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties
to be seen. Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of unresisted grief in
silence. Dashwood could think of no other question, and Thomas and the
tablecloth, now alike needless, were soon afterwards dismissed. I am always glad to see him. Churchill’s loss would be
dreadful indeed. I
hope he will overlook it. I am
afraid you will be angry.”

“My dearest sister, now be, _be_ serious. It was quite a different
sort of thing, a sentiment distinct and independent. If he were quite sincere, if he really tried to come, it was
to be inferred that Mrs. What do you think
of him? At present, indeed, they were well supplied both
with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in
the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was
the head-quarters. She declared them to be very agreeable girls
indeed, which for her ladyship was enthusiastic admiration. _These_ assured him that his
exertion had produced an increase of good-will towards himself, and
_these_ gave Elinor hopes of its being farther augmented hereafter; but
Mrs. Had you witnessed my
behaviour there, I can hardly suppose you would ever have thought well
of me again. It
gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in
no cheerful humour. Will you hear it?”

“Most willingly.”

“You shall have it in a few words. Mrs. No. I could
not bear the idea of it; so, as soon as Mr. You will see her to advantage; see her
and hear her—no, I am afraid you will not hear her at all, for she has
an aunt who never holds her tongue.”

“You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax, sir, are you?” said Mr. Mr. Knightley so placed as to see them
all; and it was his object to see as much as he could, with as little
apparent observation. Ah! They are not far off. Affectation of candour is common enough; one meets with it
everywhere. If it be not
so, let Mr. “Does nothing occur to you?—Do not you recollect?—Harriet
Smith.”

Her cheeks flushed at the name, and she felt afraid of something,
though she knew not what. I know he had horses to-day—for we arrived
together; and I laughed at him about it, but he said not a word that
could betray.”

“Well,” said Mrs. Collins
could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine’s being rather
displeased by her staying at home. how easy for those, who have no sorrow of their own to talk of
exertion! You may imagine what I felt and how I
acted. You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to mention
a word about it. She followed another carriage to Mr. Campbell be sorry to find that she has engaged herself before
their return?”

“Yes; Jane says she is sure they will; but yet, this is such a
situation as she cannot feel herself justified in declining. Knightley connected it with the dream; but how it could
all be, was beyond his comprehension. Elton’s, were unpleasant towards Harriet. “Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speaking, “I have no more to
say. Bates too, in a different way. You and Miss Fairfax gave us some
very good music. Woodhouse. I, being a husband, and you not being a wife, the
claims of the man may very likely strike us with equal force. I must be in town
next Saturday.”

“Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. Her niece was,
therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house
on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their
progress was slow, for Mr. Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best
wishes for your health and happiness.”

And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him
the next moment open the front door and quit the house. What ever she might feel of brighter hope, she betrayed
nothing. “_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Mrs. He addressed her with easy civility, and twisted his head into a bow
which assured her as plainly as words could have done, that he was
exactly the coxcomb she had heard him described to be by Lucy. My love
for Mr. Palmer soon afterwards, “I have
got such a favour to ask of you and your sister. As for
their mother, Mr. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to be
Lady Catherine; and under that apprehension was putting away her
half-finished letter, that she might escape all impertinent questions,
when the door opened, and to her very great surprise Mr. The youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy,
and of powerful operation; and if the distress be not poignant enough
to keep the eyes unclosed, they will be sure to open to sensations of
softened pain and brighter hope. Goddard’s accordingly the very next day, to undergo the necessary
penance of communication; and a severe one it was.—She had to destroy
all the hopes which she had been so industriously feeding—to appear in
the ungracious character of the one preferred—and acknowledge herself
grossly mistaken and mis-judging in all her ideas on one subject, all
her observations, all her convictions, all her prophecies for the last
six weeks. And
that you should have been so mistaken, is amazing!—I am sure, but for
believing that you entirely approved and meant to encourage me in my
attachment, I should have considered it at first too great a
presumption almost, to dare to think of him. She really
looked almost wild.”

“She did indeed, Louisa. She desired nothing better herself. He sat by her
at dinner. Goddard’s school, and somebody had
lately raised her from the condition of scholar to that of
parlour-boarder. She wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration. The only thing I do not thoroughly like is, that she
seems to be sitting out of doors, with only a little shawl over her
shoulders—and it makes one think she must catch cold.”

“But, my dear papa, it is supposed to be summer; a warm day in summer. But in
this, our last interview of friendship, I approached her with a sense
of guilt that almost took from me the power of dissembling. She was not sorry, however, to
have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the lady from
whom they sprang. Ellison, and
that, as I have been since informed, is the name of Miss Grey’s
guardian.”

“It is. Elinor wanted very much to know, though she did not chuse to ask,
whether Edward was then in town; but nothing would have induced Fanny
voluntarily to mention his name before her, till able to tell her that
his marriage with Miss Morton was resolved on, or till her husband’s
expectations on Colonel Brandon were answered; because she believed
them still so very much attached to each other, that they could not be
too sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion. “She has had the advantage, you know, of practising on me,” she
continued—“like La Baronne d’Almane on La Comtesse d’Ostalis, in Madame
de Genlis’ Adelaide and Theodore, and we shall now see her own little
Adelaide educated on a more perfect plan.”

“That is,” replied Mr. What could he mean by
such horrible indelicacy? “Oh, if that’s all,” cried Miss Steele, “we can just as well go and see
_her_.”

Elinor began to find this impertinence too much for her temper; but she
was saved the trouble of checking it, by Lucy’s sharp reprimand, which
now, as on many occasions, though it did not give much sweetness to the
manners of one sister, was of advantage in governing those of the
other. All the world are good and agreeable
in your eyes. She is still nearer.—And I do not know
whether Miss Bates is not as likely to understand the inclinations of
the rest of the people as any body. Her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating. It soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement. Where the wound had been given, there must the cure be
found if anywhere; and Emma felt that, till she saw her in the way of
cure, there could be no true peace for herself. The young ladies went, and Lady Middleton was happily preserved from
the frightful solitude which had threatened her. I condition for nothing else; but
without music, life would be a blank to me.’”

“We cannot suppose,” said Emma, smiling, “that Mr. What an agreeable man Sir
William is, Mr. I thought I
understood from the Gardiners that you had.”

“Yes; he introduced us to his sister.”

“And do you like her?”

“Very much.”

“I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year
or two. He had quitted Oxford within four and twenty hours after Lucy’s
letter arrived, and with only one object before him, the nearest road
to Barton, had had no leisure to form any scheme of conduct, with which
that road did not hold the most intimate connection. The character of Mrs. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow, he will rant and storm about
his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.”

He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before on his reading
Mr. Well, Frank, your
dream certainly shews that Highbury is in your thoughts when you are
absent. Goddard’s acquaintance. The knowledge of what her mother must be feeling as the
carriage stopt at the door—of her doubt—her dread—perhaps her
despair!—and of what _she_ had to tell!—with such knowledge it was
impossible to be calm. It is a melancholy consideration. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose
that Bingley was the person meant. my dear,’ says I, ‘it is
nothing in the world, but the red gum;’ and nurse said just the same. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody. and yet you loved him!”

“Yes. When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very
unwillingly said so. Mrs. It is a sweet place, by all accounts.”

“You have been long acquainted with Colonel Brandon, have not you?”

“Yes, a great while; ever since my sister married. Of pride, indeed, there was,
perhaps, scarcely enough; his indifference to a confusion of rank,
bordered too much on inelegance of mind. Collins was walking
the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,
in order to have

[Illustration:

“The gentlemen accompanied him.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

the earliest assurance of it; and, after making his bow as the carriage
turned into the park, hurried home with the great intelligence. I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fulfil
my engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as you
have described. Not a soul suspected anything of the
matter, not even Nancy, who, poor soul! You are quite mistaken. He had ridden home through the rain; and
had walked up directly after dinner, to see how this sweetest and best
of all creatures, faultless in spite of all her faults, bore the
discovery. They afforded her no
companion that could make amends for what she had left behind, nor that
could teach her to think of Norland with less regret than ever. Elinor, who saw as
plainly by this, as if she had seen the direction, that it must come
from Willoughby, felt immediately such a sickness at heart as made her
hardly able to hold up her head, and sat in such a general tremour as
made her fear it impossible to escape Mrs. Churchill, who threw her off
with due decorum. Mrs. if he should be
so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to draw himself, how
delightful it would be!”

Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister. Weston
most willingly undertook to play as long as they could wish to dance;
and the interesting employment had followed, of reckoning up exactly
who there would be, and portioning out the indispensable division of
space to every couple. But when there is
plenty of money on one side, and next to none on the other, Lord bless
you! Lucy continued. my dear, human flesh! For a little while Emma persevered in her
silence; but beginning to apprehend the bewitching flattery of that
letter might be too powerful, she thought it best to say,

“I lay it down as a general rule, Harriet, that if a woman _doubts_ as
to whether she should accept a man or not, she certainly ought to
refuse him. But I shall want the ribbon directly—so it had better go
to Hartfield—at least the ribbon. Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteracted her wishes with
less reluctance than she had expected to feel. I was uncomfortable enough, I was very
uncomfortable--I may say unhappy. Frank Churchill too!—Quite delightful;
so many friends!”

“No, not now, I thank you. The want
of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day. Jennings from the probability of
wishing to throw ridicule on his age. Do not
let me hear a word about the expense of it.”

“My objection is this; though I think very well of Mrs. Dashwood, when he was
leaving them. “There is so pointed, and so particular a meaning in this compliment,”
said she, “that I cannot have a doubt as to Mr. This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day’s visit might not
afford, which certainly did not belong to the present half-hour; but
the very sight of Mrs. But no sooner was the distress known to Mr. No—till Cole alluded to my
supposed attachment, it had never entered my head. Yes, certainly. [Illustration:

     “Will you come and see me?”
]




CHAPTER XXVI. She lived with her
single daughter in a very small way, and was considered with all the
regard and respect which a harmless old lady, under such untoward
circumstances, can excite. We never were so long without seeing her before,
and as I was telling Mrs. Make haste, make haste. Why should he marry?—He
is as happy as possible by himself; with his farm, and his sheep, and
his library, and all the parish to manage; and he is extremely fond of
his brother’s children. Jennings the following
natural remark. As these considerations occurred to her in painful succession, she wept
for him, more than for herself. Goddard’s—I do not know—No, I
think, Miss Woodhouse, I may just as well have it sent to Hartfield,
and take it home with me at night. She was well paid for her impudence. Mr. She says I fidget her to
death; and Miss Woodhouse looks as if she could almost say the same. There is safety in reserve,
but no attraction. They walked up stairs in to the drawing-room.—Nobody was there. He seldom appeared really
animated. When is your turn to come? Weston. Cold-hearted Elinor! no—I never conceived you could become indifferent. “He was
afraid they should have a very bad drive. They _shall_ talk. But I shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity of
your sister’s countenance and air was such as might have given the most
acute observer a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart
was not likely to be easily touched. She had fully proposed being
engaged by Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Knightley
presently, “though I have kept my thoughts to myself; but I now
perceive that it will be a very unfortunate one for Harriet. She is a standing lesson of
how to be happy. At our time of life, it is not so
pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but
for your sakes we would do anything. It must be so. Willoughby, you _ought_ to feel, and I certainly _do_, that after
what has passed, your coming here in this manner, and forcing yourself
upon my notice, requires a very particular excuse. Miss Hawkins,—I dare say, an
excellent young woman. We owe Mrs. I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of
that noble place. Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the
man and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each
was eclipsed by Mr. Encouragement should be given. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear
me. He was not a great favourite with his fair sister-in-law. But to be guarded at such a time is
very difficult. Elton could prefer, she should
think the luckiest woman in the world; for, beyond a doubt, Mr. Knightley must never
marry. Dear Harriet!—I would not change
you for the clearest-headed, longest-sighted, best-judging female
breathing. Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell. “And who knows but you may raise
a dance,” said she. But I know the
foundation is unjust. Jane speaks so distinct! She did most heartily
grieve over the idleness of her childhood—and sat down and practised
vigorously an hour and a half. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. Mrs. You got Hannah that good place. To the civil inquiries which then
poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the
much superior solicitude of Mr. Every thing he
did, was right. Willoughby’s behaviour
in taking leave of them, his embarrassment, and affectation of
cheerfulness, and, above all, his unwillingness to accept her mother’s
invitation, a backwardness so unlike a lover, so unlike himself,
greatly disturbed her. He had his
shepherd’s son into the parlour one night on purpose to sing to her. When she was discontented, she
fancied herself nervous. Jennings
very plainly heard Elinor say, and with a voice which showed her to
feel what she said,

“I shall always think myself very much obliged to you.”

Mrs. Jennings were invited
likewise, and John Dashwood was careful to secure Colonel Brandon, who,
always glad to be where the Miss Dashwoods were, received his eager
civilities with some surprise, but much more pleasure. A short, a very
short time however must now decide what Willoughby’s intentions were;
in all probability he was already in town. It was a done thing; Mr. It ought to
be no recommendation to _you_. “Could not she see that we wanted her gone!—how teazing to Edward!”

“Why so?—we were all his friends, and Lucy has been the longest known
to him of any. yes, perfectly.—Why
do you make a doubt of it?”

“Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her, or
that she admired him?”

“Never, never!” she cried with a most open eagerness—“Never, for the
twentieth part of a moment, did such an idea occur to me. Jennings interposed most
acceptably; for to send the Colonel away while his love was in so much
uneasiness on her sister’s account, would be to deprive them both, she
thought, of every comfort; and therefore telling him at once that his
stay at Cleveland was necessary to herself, that she should want him to
play at piquet of an evening, while Miss Dashwood was above with her
sister, &c. And I think you will agree with me, in
considering a removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his
account and my niece’s. Bingley followed his advice. CHAPTER X


One morning, about ten days after Mrs. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking,
and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alone. Frank Churchill, ‘Miss Woodhouse’s
opinion of the instrument will be worth having.’—But, said I, I shall
be more sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me.—‘Oh,’ said
he, ‘wait half a minute, till I have finished my job;’—For, would you
believe it, Miss Woodhouse, there he is, in the most obliging manner in
the world, fastening in the rivet of my mother’s spectacles.—The rivet
came out, you know, this morning.—So very obliging!—For my mother had
no use of her spectacles—could not put them on. My heart was in Highbury, and my business was to
get my body thither as often as might be, and with the least suspicion. One of those points on
which his influence failed, he then mentioned. Bennet was quite
disconcerted. Marianne entered the house with a heart swelling with emotion from the
consciousness of being only eighty miles from Barton, and not thirty
from Combe Magna; and before she had been five minutes within its
walls, while the others were busily helping Charlotte to show her child
to the housekeeper, she quitted it again, stealing away through the
winding shrubberies, now just beginning to be in beauty, to gain a
distant eminence; where, from its Grecian temple, her eye, wandering
over a wide tract of country to the south-east, could fondly rest on
the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon, and fancy that from their
summits Combe Magna might be seen. Miss Woodhouse, how kind you are!—I suppose you have heard—and are
come to give us joy. He may live twenty years longer. Such violence of affliction indeed could not be supported for ever; it
sunk within a few days into a calmer melancholy; but these employments,
to which she daily recurred, her solitary walks and silent meditations,
still produced occasional effusions of sorrow as lively as ever. It raises my influence much
too high; the power of dividing two people so tenderly attached is too
much for an indifferent person.”

“’Tis because you are an indifferent person,” said Lucy, with some
pique, and laying a particular stress on those words, “that your
judgment might justly have such weight with me. The sight of your dear sister, however,
was really dreadful; and, to heighten the matter, I found her alone. I am
amazed that you should think of such a thing.”

“My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to think of it. My partiality does not blind me; he certainly is not so
handsome as Willoughby; but at the same time, there is something much
more pleasing in his countenance. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.”

Elizabeth obeyed; and, running into her own room for her parasol,
attended her noble guest downstairs. Where did you hear it?”

“In a stationer’s shop in Pall Mall, where I had business. They have not the same
force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. Elton was immediately in sight; and so near as to give Emma
time only to say farther,

“Ah! She might in
time regain tranquillity; but _he_, what had he to look forward to? “Might he be trusted with the commission, what infinite pleasure should
he have in executing it! Two such she did not want. Had he been even old,
ugly, and vulgar, the gratitude and kindness of Mrs. It may bring many extenuations. It might be a very
indifferent piece of wit, but Emma found a great deal to laugh at and
enjoy in it—and so did Frank and Harriet.—It did not seem to touch the
rest of the party equally; some looked very stupid about it, and Mr. When they all sat down it was better; to her taste a great deal better,
for Frank Churchill grew talkative and gay, making her his first
object. But neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once, and Emma
was now in a humour to resolve that they should both come in time. They will
be so near their own stable.”

“So they will, my dear. Such a debasement on his! Her early attachment to herself was
very amiable; and her inclination for good company, and power of
appreciating what was elegant and clever, shewed that there was no want
of taste, though strength of understanding must not be expected. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine’s
connections. Knightley was there too, was he?”

“No, not Mr. The
acknowledged lovers talked and laughed; the unacknowledged were silent. Has Perry seen her? What advantage can it be to you
to offend Mr. Ferrars; and towards us
have behaved in the friendliest manner. Mrs. Weston had, of course,
formed a very favourable idea of the young man; and such a pleasing
attention was an irresistible proof of his great good sense, and a most
welcome addition to every source and every expression of congratulation
which her marriage had already secured. I want to see you
permanently well connected, and to that end it will be advisable to
have as few odd acquaintance as may be; and, therefore, I say that if
you should still be in this country when Mr. Perry called at Hartfield, the same morning, it
appeared that she was so much indisposed as to have been visited,
though against her own consent, by himself, and that she was suffering
under severe headaches, and a nervous fever to a degree, which made him
doubt the possibility of her going to Mrs. Bingley comes, my dear,” said Mrs. She speaks a little too quick. My charge would be much more concise
than her’s, and probably not much in the same spirit; all that I have
to recommend being comprised in, do not spoil them, and do not physic
them.”

“I rather hope to satisfy you both,” said Emma, “for I shall do all in
my power to make them happy, which will be enough for Isabella; and
happiness must preclude false indulgence and physic.”

“And if you find them troublesome, you must send them home again.”

“That is very likely. “It is unlucky,” said she, after a short pause, “that you should not be
able to see your friends before they leave the country. “Harriet must give us as much of her company as she can while my
brother and sister are here. “Well, and so, just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was
called away upon business to that horrid man Mr. I did not see it to advantage, for nothing could be more
forlorn than the furniture,—but if it were newly fitted up—a couple of
hundred pounds, Willoughby says, would make it one of the pleasantest
summer-rooms in England.”

Could Elinor have listened to her without interruption from the others,
she would have described every room in the house with equal delight. But she is
nothing to me now. In honest words, her money was
necessary to me, and in a situation like mine, any thing was to be done
to prevent a rupture. Otway, I protest!—and good Mr. Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost;
and all that was amiable, all that ought to be attaching, seemed on
Harriet’s side, not her own. Were she a woman of fortune, I would leave every harmless
absurdity to take its chance, I would not quarrel with you for any
liberties of manner. Weston, and others!—I hate the
recollection.”

“Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day, out
of so few, in having your hair cut.”

“No,” said he, smiling, “that is no subject of regret at all. I am sorry to pain you, but so it was. There were not
merely no grammatical errors, but as a composition it would not have
disgraced a gentleman; the language, though plain, was strong and
unaffected, and the sentiments it conveyed very much to the credit of
the writer. As soon as I get to town, I shall go to my brother, and make him
come home with me to Gracechurch Street, and then we may consult
together as to what is to be done.”

“Oh, my dear brother,” replied Mrs. “I was afraid you would think I was taking a great liberty with you,”
said she, “in telling you all this. Mrs. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. She might have been
unconsciously sucking in the sad poison, while a sharer of his
conversation with her friend; and from the best, the purest of motives,
might now be denying herself this visit to Ireland, and resolving to
divide herself effectually from him and his connexions by soon
beginning her career of laborious duty. just behind. The former left them soon after tea to fulfill her evening
engagements; and Elinor was obliged to assist in making a whist table
for the others. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. He had come,
in his anxiety to see how she bore Frank Churchill’s engagement, with
no selfish view, no view at all, but of endeavouring, if she allowed
him an opening, to soothe or to counsel her.—The rest had been the work
of the moment, the immediate effect of what he heard, on his feelings. She felt that, in quitting Donwell, he must
be sacrificing a great deal of independence of hours and habits; that
in living constantly with her father, and in no house of his own, there
would be much, very much, to be borne with. He entered the room with a
look of self-consequence, slightly bowed to the ladies, without
speaking a word, and, after briefly surveying them and their
apartments, took up a newspaper from the table, and continued to read
it as long as he staid. We will put it by, that when he comes
again...But it may be months, perhaps, before _that_ happens.”

“Months!” cried Marianne, with strong surprise. for better, for worse.”

Emma grieved that she could not be more openly just to one important
service which his better sense would have rendered her, to the advice
which would have saved her from the worst of all her womanly
follies—her wilful intimacy with Harriet Smith; but it was too tender a
subject.—She could not enter on it.—Harriet was very seldom mentioned
between them. Darcy than they had before any idea of;
it was evident that he was very much in love with her. Long has promised to introduce him.”

“I do not believe Mrs. I could never tell whether an attachment between you and
Mr. But at length, by Elizabeth’s persuasion,
he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation;
and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her
resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity
to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait on
them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had
received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the
visits of her uncle and aunt from the city. Weston, who had been a widower so long, and who
seemed so perfectly comfortable without a wife, so constantly occupied
either in his business in town or among his friends here, always
acceptable wherever he went, always cheerful—Mr. It is a necessary of life
to me; and having always been used to a very musical society, both at
Maple Grove and in Bath, it would have been a most serious sacrifice. We really must wish you good
night.”

Jane’s alertness in moving, proved her as ready as her aunt had
preconceived. “I am afraid, Mr. But the horror of what might possibly happen
almost took from me my faculties.”

“Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. Under such
     circumstances, however, he was not likely to be proof against the
     temptation of immediate relief. Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward. While you were in the smallest
degree wavering, I said nothing about it, because I would not
influence; but it would have been the loss of a friend to me. For two or three months longer I
shall remain where I am, and as I am.”

“And I am quite serious too, I assure you,” replied Mrs. Mrs. I have no idea of that sort of
thing. We must
go, for the Westons come to us next week you know. Jennings, by being much
engaged in her own room, could see little of what was passing. I do not by any means engage for
its being returned. He distrusts his own judgment in such matters so
much, that he is always unwilling to give his opinion on any picture;
but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste, which in
general direct him perfectly right.”

Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no more on the subject; but
the kind of approbation which Elinor described as excited in him by the
drawings of other people, was very far from that rapturous delight,
which, in her opinion, could alone be called taste. [Illustration]

As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits;
or, in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects
which must deaden them more. The tumult of
her mind was now painfully great. The ladies knew better how to
allay it. Elton?”

These days of confinement would have been, but for her private
perplexities, remarkably comfortable, as such seclusion exactly suited
her brother, whose feelings must always be of great importance to his
companions; and he had, besides, so thoroughly cleared off his
ill-humour at Randalls, that his amiableness never failed him during
the rest of his stay at Hartfield. or a shark? People of the name of Tupman, very lately settled there, and
encumbered with many low connexions, but giving themselves immense
airs, and expecting to be on a footing with the old established
families. “More than an attachment, indeed,” resumed Mrs. Mr. It has given me leisure and calmness for serious
recollection. While she with the truest affection had been
planning a most eligible connection for him, was it to be supposed that
he could be all the time secretly engaged to another person!—such a
suspicion could never have entered her head! He immediately offered to fetch her
others; all that his library afforded. [Illustration]

Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in
vain for Mr. He
was not an ill-tempered man, not so often unreasonably cross as to
deserve such a reproach; but his temper was not his great perfection;
and, indeed, with such a worshipping wife, it was hardly possible that
any natural defects in it should not be increased. His
visit afforded her but a very partial satisfaction, while his own
enjoyment in it appeared so imperfect. What do you imagine
his age to be?”

“He was four-and-twenty the 8th of last June, and my birthday is the
23rd just a fortnight and a day’s difference—which is very odd.”

“Only four-and-twenty. She was to convey Harriet, and they drove to the Crown in good
time, the Randalls party just sufficiently before them. dear—I think you play the best of the two. He was
angry. My visit was
not long, as Caroline and Mrs. How can you be so cross as not to come? It was to this effect:--

“Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a
most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you--be
assured that we are all well. I thought I could not be so deceived; but now,
it is clear; the state of his mind is as clear and decided, as my
wishes on the subject have been ever since I knew you. “I found,” said he, “as the time drew near, that I had better not meet
Mr. I should myself have shrunk from any thing so hasty,
and she would have felt every scruple of mine with multiplied strength
and refinement.—But I had no choice. Mr. “‘When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which
took him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as we
are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when
Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have
determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend
his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. The delightful family
party which Emma was securing for herself, poor Harriet must, in mere
charitable caution, be kept at a distance from. Elton, who only wanted to be talking herself. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him for
the first two months: but he never distinguished _her_ by any particular
attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and
wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment,
who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.”

It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added
to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject by
its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during
the whole of the journey. Don’t fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me, for I
shan’t put myself at all out of my way for you. She dreaded seeing Wickham
again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. Mr. Mr. Should the result of her
observations be unfavourable, she was determined at all events to open
the eyes of her sister; should it be otherwise, her exertions would be
of a different nature—she must then learn to avoid every selfish
comparison, and banish every regret which might lessen her satisfaction
in the happiness of Marianne. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me
wrong. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was
delighted. I meant to take them over to John Saunders the first thing I
did, but something or other hindered me all the morning; first one
thing, then another, there is no saying what, you know. Compressed into the very lowest vacant corner were these
words—“I had not a spare moment on Tuesday, as you know, for Miss
Woodhouse’s beautiful little friend. Their presence always gave her pain,
and she hardly knew how to make a very gracious return to the
overpowering delight of Lucy in finding her _still_ in town. Gilbert wishes to dance,” said he, “I shall have great
pleasure, I am sure—for, though beginning to feel myself rather an old
married man, and that my dancing days are over, it would give me very
great pleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend like Mrs. Her smile however changed to a sigh when she
remembered that promise to Willoughby was yet unfulfilled, and feared
she had that to communicate which might again unsettle the mind of
Marianne, and ruin at least for a time this fair prospect of busy
tranquillity. Dixon, and the not
going to Ireland, she said, with the insidious design of farther
discovery,

“You must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax should be allowed to
come to you at such a time. “What is Mr. By his own
marriage, likewise, which happened soon afterwards, he added to his
wealth. Interference—fruitless
interference. He
never wished to attach me. Robert Martin.”

“Whoever might be her parents,” said Mr. After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. “I am almost certain that
the meeting at the Crown is not till to-morrow.—Mr. Mrs. But now I have no doubt of seeing him here about the second week in
January.”

“What a very great pleasure it will be to you! I
understand she is a woman of very good fortune. A very few days brought the party
from London, and she had no sooner an opportunity of being one hour
alone with Harriet, than she became perfectly satisfied—unaccountable
as it was!—that Robert Martin had thoroughly supplanted Mr. I know the summer will pass happily away. He was too diffident
to do justice to himself; but when his natural shyness was overcome,
his behaviour gave every indication of an open, affectionate heart. CHAPTER V


Small heart had Harriet for visiting. A
man who had been in motion since eight o’clock in the morning, and
might now have been still, who had been long talking, and might have
been silent, who had been in more than one crowd, and might have been
alone!—Such a man, to quit the tranquillity and independence of his own
fireside, and on the evening of a cold sleety April day rush out again
into the world!—Could he by a touch of his finger have instantly taken
back his wife, there would have been a motive; but his coming would
probably prolong rather than break up the party. In all
probability she was at this very time waited for there; and Mr. I have more than half an expectation of our all going abroad. Willoughby’s opinion in almost every matter of importance. Their tendency is gross and illiberal; and if
their construction could ever be deemed clever, time has long ago
destroyed all its ingenuity.”

Sir John did not much understand this reproof; but he laughed as
heartily as if he did, and then replied,

“Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare say, one way or other. Shall I tell you my guess?”

“What do you mean?”

“Shall I tell you?”

“Certainly.”

“Well then; I guess that Mr. “Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. Mamma would like to
go, too, of all things! Goddard’s to-day; and she may be detained by a visitor, without
thinking him at all a tiresome wretch.”

“Pray, Mr. They both seemed delighted with their drive; but said only in
general terms that they had kept in the lanes, while the others went on
the downs. Poor thing! Poor fellow! I
did not expect such a compliment.”

“Did not you? Palmer, though very unwilling to go as well from real humanity
and good-nature, as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away
by his wife, was persuaded at last by Colonel Brandon to perform his
promise of following her; and while he was preparing to go, Colonel
Brandon himself, with a much greater exertion, began to talk of going
likewise.—Here, however, the kindness of Mrs. Arthur!—How do
you do? Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage
than to herself. To this determination she was the more easily
reconciled, by recollecting that Edward Ferrars, by Lucy’s account, was
not to be in town before February; and that their visit, without any
unreasonable abridgement, might be previously finished. “He is just what a young-man ought to be,” said she, “sensible,
good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners! I can imagine, that
before she had seen any body superior, she might tolerate him. Frank Churchill
writes one of the best gentleman’s hands I ever saw.”

“I do not admire it,” said Mr. I have had no hand in it. “Mrs. “Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Barton, Elinor,” said she,
as she sat down to work, “and with how heavy a heart does he travel?”

“It is all very strange. That Mr. There will be very little merit in making a good wife to
such a man as Mr. Woodhouse, a
vast deal of chat, and backgammon.—Tea was made downstairs, biscuits
and baked apples and wine before she came away: amazing luck in some of
her throws: and she inquired a great deal about you, how you were
amused, and who were your partners. You like news—and I heard an article in my way hither that I think will
interest you.”

“News! An express arrived at Randalls to announce the
death of Mrs. Even _then_, however, when fully
determined on paying my addresses to her, I allowed myself most
improperly to put off, from day to day, the moment of doing it, from an
unwillingness to enter into an engagement while my circumstances were
so greatly embarrassed. I have no business to put myself forward.”

Mr. It was not in his calmness that she read
his comparative indifference. Dashwood,
whose eyes, as she answered the servant’s inquiry, had intuitively
taken the same direction, was shocked to perceive by Elinor’s
countenance how much she really suffered, and a moment afterwards,
alike distressed by Marianne’s situation, knew not on which child to
bestow her principal attention. You will
gain a brother, a real, affectionate brother. These recollections will not do at
all. Could the
event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance!—But of that,
unfortunately, there could be no chance. “Where could you
possibly hear it, Mr. Is
she angry?”

“Not at all, I believe, with you.”

“That is a good thing. yes, I always like news. We both abhor suspense. Her departure, therefore, was fixed on; and within an hour
after Mr. F.; but no one can throw any
blame on them. Weston informed her that she was going to
call on the Bateses, in order to hear the new instrument. She asked her at different times how many sisters
she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of
them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they
had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been her
mother’s maiden name? All the better. They were stopping, however, in the
first place at Mrs. Precious as was the company of her daughter to her, she
desired nothing so much as to give up its constant enjoyment to her
valued friend; and to see Marianne settled at the mansion-house was
equally the wish of Edward and Elinor. Look at my shoes. He is, indeed. Weston was at last persuaded to believe, or to say,
that it must be by some attack of Mrs. You, who have been hearing and seeing so much of late on
these subjects, who must have been so deep in the business on Miss
Campbell’s account—we shall not excuse your being indifferent about Mr. Martin,
and there was evidently no dislike to it. I have done with match-making indeed. Palmer expects you; so you
cannot refuse to come.”

They both eagerly and resolutely declined her invitation. We were speaking the other day,
you know, of his being so warm an admirer of her performance.”

“Yes, and what you told me on that head, confirmed an idea which I had
entertained before.—I do not mean to reflect upon the good intentions
of either Mr. I am not
like Jane; I wish I were. It would be needless to say, that the gentlemen advanced in the good
opinion of each other, as they advanced in each other’s acquaintance,
for it could not be otherwise. This is a
connexion which offers nothing but good. “She loves him then excessively, I
suppose. There was, at times, a want of spirits about him which, if
it did not denote indifference, spoke of something almost as
unpromising. “It was a foolish, idle inclination on my side,” said he, “the
consequence of ignorance of the world, and want of employment. May I ask
whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the
moment, or are the result of previous study?”

“They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time; and though I
sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant
compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to
give them as unstudied an air as possible.”

Mr. Jennings was desirous of her feeling; for besides that the
circumstance did not in her opinion justify such lasting amazement or
variety of speculation, her wonder was otherwise disposed of. A reasonable visit paid, Mr. An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards despatched; and already had
Mrs. There will not be time for any thing.”

“It is unfortunate that they cannot stay longer—but it seems a case of
necessity. She expected
from other people the same opinions and feelings as her own, and she
judged of their motives by the immediate effect of their actions on
herself. Darcy, who, though
extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly
drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William,--

“Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. It is not in
the smallest degree connected with any human being of the name of
Knightley.”

Emma’s courage returned, and she walked on. He could not believe her to be encouraging him. Though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law had
made her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer than was
unavoidable, it had not produced the smallest effect on her in that
point to which it principally tended. ‘You _must_
_all_ spend your evening with us,’ said she—‘I positively must have you
_all_ come.’”

“Mr. “I have spent
four days in the same house with him, and I think him very
disagreeable.”

“I have no right to give _my_ opinion,” said Wickham, “as to his being
agreeable or otherwise. Whatever he
might have heard against me—ought he not to have suspended his belief? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley’s
way.”

Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet
was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an
epithet. One meeting was unavoidable.”

Elinor, startled by his manner, looked at him anxiously, saying,

“What? His admiration was certainly
very warm; yet she thought, but for Mrs. My dear Jane, are you
sure you did not wet your feet?—It was but a drop or two, but I am so
afraid:—but Mr. Their propriety, simplicity, and elegance, would make them the safest
model for any young woman.”

“And who do you think came in while we were there?”

Emma was quite at a loss. After
discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them,
with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the
affection of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained
that it was merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had
been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at
Longbourn, whither he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight;
for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that
she wished it to take place as soon as possible, which he trusted would
be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early
day for making him the happiest of men. You have employed your
time much better. I could not bear to leave the
country in a manner that might lead you, or the rest of the
neighbourhood, to suspect any part of what had really passed between
Mrs. who could have done less for her? Elton only looked very conscious and smiling, and rode off in great
spirits. Brandon is one of
them. “Ay, there she comes,” continued Mrs. She did not do any of it in the same way that she
used; I could see she was altered; but, however, she seemed to _try_ to
be very friendly, and we shook hands, and stood talking some time; but
I know no more what I said—I was in such a tremble!—I remember she said
she was sorry we never met now; which I thought almost too kind! Dixon had written most pressingly. What a fine thing for our girls!”

“How so? Darcy by
character perfectly well. Willoughby in
your sister’s writing. I am sorry Mr. Can they have
quarrelled? No, you shall send it to Hartfield, if you please. “What would she have said? The distressing explanation she had to make to
Harriet, and all that poor Harriet would be suffering, with the
awkwardness of future meetings, the difficulties of continuing or
discontinuing the acquaintance, of subduing feelings, concealing
resentment, and avoiding eclat, were enough to occupy her in most
unmirthful reflections some time longer, and she went to bed at last
with nothing settled but the conviction of her having blundered most
dreadfully. Darcy, the superior in
consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Harriet, tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word, was always
very long at a purchase; and while she was still hanging over muslins
and changing her mind, Emma went to the door for amusement.—Much could
not be hoped from the traffic of even the busiest part of Highbury;—Mr. You may
have done wrong with regard to Mr. Dashwood was!”

To this Elinor had no answer to make, and did not attempt any. Perry does not call it
altogether a sickly season.”

“No, I do not know that Mr. if you have not got your
spotted muslin on!—I wonder you was not afraid of its being torn.”

Such was her parting concern; for after this, she had time only to pay
her farewell compliments to Mrs. Without thinking highly either of men or of matrimony,
marriage had always been her object: it was the only honourable
provision for well-educated young women of small fortune, and, however
uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative
from want. Jennings exceedingly. The Miss Steeles, as she expected, had now all the benefit of these
jokes, and in the eldest of them they raised a curiosity to know the
name of the gentleman alluded to, which, though often impertinently
expressed, was perfectly of a piece with her general inquisitiveness
into the concerns of their family. The expression
of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and
steady gravity. But, poor fellow! “Well, so much the better. It
was also a very early speculation with Emma. It is my party. and Mrs. These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed
in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and
dressing a salad and cucumber. How directly, how strongly had he expressed
himself to her on the subject!—Not too strongly for the offence—but
far, far too strongly to issue from any feeling softer than upright
justice and clear-sighted goodwill.—She had no hope, nothing to deserve
the name of hope, that he could have that sort of affection for herself
which was now in question; but there was a hope (at times a slight one,
at times much stronger,) that Harriet might have deceived herself, and
be overrating his regard for _her_.—Wish it she must, for his sake—be
the consequence nothing to herself, but his remaining single all his
life. I should not be helped so soon, but it smells most excellent,
and I cannot help beginning.”

Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr. He would do any good to her, or her family; but—”

“Well,” said Mrs. Elton are by situation called together; you belong to one
another by every circumstance of your respective homes. This cannot be! The name makes me think of poor Isabella; for she was very near being
christened Catherine after her grandmama. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr. No
     arguments shall be wanting on my part, that can alleviate so severe
     a misfortune; or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that
     must be, of all others, most afflicting to a parent’s mind. How is Mr. Every feeling was offended; and
the forbearance of her outward submission left a heavy arrear due of
secret severity in her reflections on the unmanageable goodwill of Mr. Perfectly
remember Mrs. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his
aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose
that he thought much higher of her Ladyship than _she_ could do; and it
was certain, that in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with _one_
whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would
address him on his weakest side. And besides the operation of this, as a general principle, you may be
sure that Miss Fairfax awes Mrs. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I
     believe, to considerably more than a thousand pounds, another
     thousand in addition to her own settled upon _her_, and his
     commission purchased. “What is the matter with Brandon?” said Sir John. They were brought together by
mutual affection, with the warmest approbation of their real friends;
their intimate knowledge of each other seemed to make their happiness
certain—and they only wanted something to live upon. a
great pity indeed! The feelings which you tell me have long prevented
the acknowledgment of your regard can have little difficulty in
overcoming it after this explanation.”

Mr. It was an unsuitable connexion, and did not produce
much happiness. The Coxes were wondering last night whether she would get into
any great family. “_He_ is undoubtedly very much in love—every thing denotes it—very much
in love indeed!—and when he comes again, if his affection continue, I
must be on my guard not to encourage it.—It would be most inexcusable
to do otherwise, as my own mind is quite made up. Stone. He begged
pardon for having displeased her. Perry!—such attention to Jane!”—And from
her great, her more than commonly thankful delight towards Mrs. But if there should by any
chance happen to be a woman who is single at seven and twenty, I should
not think Colonel Brandon’s being thirty-five any objection to his
marrying _her_.”

“A woman of seven and twenty,” said Marianne, after pausing a moment,
“can never hope to feel or inspire affection again, and if her home be
uncomfortable, or her fortune small, I can suppose that she might bring
herself to submit to the offices of a nurse, for the sake of the
provision and security of a wife. “Oh!” she cried in evident embarrassment, “it all meant nothing; a mere
joke among ourselves.”

“The joke,” he replied gravely, “seemed confined to you and Mr. The congratulatory letter which
Elizabeth received from Lydia on her marriage explained to her that, by
his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. Happy creature! The
letter was to this effect:--

     /* “My dear Lizzy, */

     “I wish you joy. “I declare I cannot recollect what I was talking of.—Oh! “Oh! I know we agreed never to name him—but
considering how infinitely superior he is to every body else, I should
not have thought it possible that I could be supposed to mean any other
person. Darcy, with
such a smile over the face, as she remembered to have sometimes seen,
when he looked at her. the
happiest, wisest, and most reasonable end!”

In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with her
father had been short and to the purpose. A small sum could not do all this.”

“No,” said her father. It was forwarded to me from
Delaford, and I received it on the very morning of our intended party
to Whitwell; and this was the reason of my leaving Barton so suddenly,
which I am sure must at the time have appeared strange to every body,
and which I believe gave offence to some. Perry was very anxious that he should
have a carriage, and came to my mother in great spirits one morning
because she thought she had prevailed. Ellison would
not be sorry to have Miss Grey married, for she and Mrs. Frank Churchill that I meant. Weston observed, “all young people would have their
little whims.”

There was one person among his new acquaintance in Surry, not so
leniently disposed. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her
housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. But as they
drew towards the end of it, their interest in the appearance of a
country which they were to inhabit overcame their dejection, and a view
of Barton Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness. Palmer laughed, and said it would not do her any harm. And, in short—what do you think of my
wife’s style of letter-writing?—delicate—tender—truly feminine—was it
not?”

“Your wife!—The letter was in your own hand-writing.”

“Yes, but I had only the credit of servilely copying such sentences as
I was ashamed to put my name to. Weston has told me
himself. Bates?”

“Yes—entirely her own doing, entirely her own choice; and Colonel and
Mrs. It
really was so. He has broken no faith
with me.”

“But he told you that he loved you.”

“Yes—no—never absolutely. Harris at four o’clock;—when his assurances,
his felicitations on a recovery in her sister even surpassing his
expectation, gave her confidence, comfort, and tears of joy. Weston?—Judge between us. He is a
most charming young man. And now I
come to the principal, the only important part of my conduct while
belonging to you, which excites my own anxiety, or requires very
solicitous explanation. CHAPTER XXXIII. Mr. He was arm-in-arm with Mr. for they say he is monstrous fond of her, as well
he may. After a short silence on both sides, Mrs. His plan did not vary on seeing them. can it be really so? Bennet; “that is very unlucky.”

“Can I have the carriage?” said Jane. Jennings her carpet-work; they talked of the
friends they had left behind, arranged Lady Middleton’s engagements,
and wondered whether Mr. It was now her
darling object. “Good Heaven! It was more
than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such
attention. “Is that
Fanny’s hair? I am sure of having their
opinions with me.”

“I know that you all love her really too well to be unjust or unkind;
but excuse me, Mr. Are
you quite sure that you understand the terms on which Mr. Mrs. She was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to
share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a
family so deranged; a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and
requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing
could be done for Lydia, her uncle’s interference seemed of the utmost
importance, and till he entered the room the misery of her impatience
was severe. She is very fond of Frank, and
therefore I would not speak ill of her. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what
she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was
convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. He was here only a
quarter of an hour, and in a state of agitation which did not allow the
full use even of the time he could stay—but that there had been
misunderstandings he decidedly said. It was no more than a wish. Elinor said no more; it
immediately struck her that she must then be writing to Willoughby; and
the conclusion which as instantly followed was, that, however
mysteriously they might wish to conduct the affair, they must be
engaged. He had business at the Crown about his hay, and a great many errands
for Mrs. The next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a visit from their
brother, who came with a most serious aspect to talk over the dreadful
affair, and bring them news of his wife. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de
Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he
felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness,
mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a
clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of
pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility. [Illustration]

Their sister’s wedding-day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her
probably more than she felt for herself. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Darcy! At breakfast she neither ate, nor attempted to eat any thing; and
Elinor’s attention was then all employed, not in urging her, not in
pitying her, nor in appearing to regard her, but in endeavouring to
engage Mrs. Dashwood? Cole. Common sense would have
directed her to tell Harriet, that she must not allow herself to think
of him, and that there were five hundred chances to one against his
ever caring for her.—“But, with common sense,” she added, “I am afraid
I have had little to do.”

She was extremely angry with herself. Collins had promised; and, as he
had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by
her Ladyship’s desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish
nothing greater. Come, Jane, take my other arm.”

Jane declined it, however, and the husband and wife walked off. I
am sure I shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I am
confined, if Mrs. Can I do any thing for _you_?”

“No, I thank you. Weston, to people
of large fortune?—You would be amazed to hear how my brother, Mr. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at
all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion. I
congratulate you, my dear Harriet, with all my heart. Smith was in it, with whom Marianne had not the smallest
acquaintance. In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to
the compliment of such a man’s affection, and though her intentions did
not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to
receive; till roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she lost
all compassion in anger. What do
you keep winking at me for? [Illustration]

With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise
diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and
sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. She was not of so ungovernable a
temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia’s example, she
became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less
ignorant, and less insipid. Elton was wanting notice, which
nobody had inclination to pay, and she was herself in a worry of
spirits which would have made her prefer being silent. I knew how it would be--I knew he would manage
everything. I met her frequently at Weymouth. And when you have given _your_ ball,” she
added, “I shall insist on their giving one also. They shook hands with
great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen
to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of Jane’s perfections;
and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his
expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for
basis the excellent understanding and super-excellent disposition of
Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and
himself. And now I can tolerably comprehend his behaviour. The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma, in a note from Mrs. You will like Harriet. Edward remained a week at the cottage; he was earnestly pressed by Mrs. Marianne’s abilities were, in many respects, quite equal to Elinor’s. Could you have believed such a
thing possible? “Not yet,” replied Jane. Why did not you ask the Gilberts to come to us today?”

“Did not I tell you, Sir John, when you spoke to me about it before,
that it could not be done? She could only imagine, however,
at last, that she drew his notice because there was something about her
more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in
any other person present. “Undoubtedly, if they had known your engagement,” said she, “nothing
could be more flattering than their treatment of you;—but as that was
not the case—”

“I guessed you would say so,”—replied Lucy quickly—“but there was no
reason in the world why Mrs. is
it really true?”

Elinor would not speak. Bates’s door. Dixon seems a very charming young man, quite worthy of him. Mr. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke
ten words to her through the whole of Saturday: and though they were at
one time left by themselves for half an hour, he adhered most
conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her. Darcy give you his reasons for this interference?”

“I understood that there were some very strong objections against the
lady.”

“And what arts did he use to separate them?”

“He did not talk to me of his own arts,” said Fitzwilliam, smiling. “Well, Miss Woodhouse,” he almost immediately began, “your inclination
for dancing has not been quite frightened away, I hope, by the terrors
of my father’s little rooms. My dear Hill, have you
heard the good news? such an openness and gentleness in his manner.”

“There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those
two young men. Mrs. I hope not of a putrid
infectious sort. His opinion, however, made some little amends for
his delay, for though acknowledging a very unexpected and unpleasant
alteration in his patient, he would not allow the danger to be
material, and talked of the relief which a fresh mode of treatment must
procure, with a confidence which, in a lesser degree, was communicated
to Elinor. you are too obliging! Knightley passing through the garden door, and coming
towards her.—It was the first intimation of his being returned from
London. My youngest sister has left all her
friends--has eloped; has thrown herself into the power of--of Mr. “May she always be poor, if she
can employ her riches no better.”

“Thank you, Willoughby. Bennet had been down stairs, but on this
happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in
spirits oppressively high. John
Knightley)—your good fortune in meeting with so many of your friends at
once here, delights you too much to pass unnoticed. He
came to them every day. Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could
regard with any complacency. What feelings have they, the season,
the air altogether inspired! He laughed
most immoderately. Poor fellow! To take her—be it only an hour or two—from her
aunt, to give her change of air and scene, and quiet rational
conversation, even for an hour or two, might do her good; and the
following morning she wrote again to say, in the most feeling language
she could command, that she would call for her in the carriage at any
hour that Jane would name—mentioning that she had Mr. When Lucy first came to Barton Park
last November, she told me in confidence of her engagement.”

At these words, Marianne’s eyes expressed the astonishment which her
lips could not utter. To persuade
him against returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been
given, was scarcely the work of a moment. They are
jealous even of his regard for his father. Mrs. “Good heavens!” cried Elinor, “what do you mean? CHAPTER XIX. Better wait an hour or two, or even
half a day for your letters, than run the risk of bringing on your
cough again. But it has been the study of
my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong
understanding to ridicule.”

“Such as vanity and pride.”

“Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. If you should
     have no objection to receive me into your house, I propose myself
     the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Monday,
     November 18th, by four o’clock, and shall probably trespass on your
     hospitality till the Saturday se’nnight following, which I can do
     without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting
     to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other
     clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day. His card was on the table when they came in from the
morning’s drive. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly
with a large party. But, perhaps, he could not in her
mother’s presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. The chances are that she must be
a gainer.”

“Well,” said Emma, willing to let it pass—“you want to hear about the
wedding; and I shall be happy to tell you, for we all behaved
charmingly. I do not advise the
custard. their luxury and ease. To suffer her to engage herself—to suffer her
even to think of such a measure!”

“He knew nothing about it, Emma. She could see him
instantly before her, in every charm of air and address, but she could
remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the
neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had gained him in
the mess. The
invitation was everywhere so well received, that it seemed as if, like
Mrs. Mr. Weston
and Mr. There were moments in abundance, when, if not by the absence of her
mother and sisters, at least by the nature of their employments,
conversation was forbidden among them, and every effect of solitude was
produced. Mr. But then I
have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I would not take
the trouble of practising. Her character appeared
absolutely changed. Your sisters will
marry, and it will be gone for ever. Thank you, we do indeed. I have
written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements,
and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. “Who could have thought it? As she reflected more, she seemed but to feel
it more. Weston did not like it, was
clear enough, by her passing it over as quickly as possible, and making
no other comment than that “all young people would have their little
whims.”

With the exception of this little blot, Emma found that his visit
hitherto had given her friend only good ideas of him. Emma could not deplore her future absence as any deduction
from her own enjoyment. Darcy’s
explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion,
heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. Weston than by herself—but even he had never been able to finish the
subject better than by saying—“Those matters will take care of
themselves; the young people will find a way.” But here there was
nothing to be shifted off in a wild speculation on the future. Elinor saw, and pitied her for, the neglect of abilities
which education might have rendered so respectable; but she saw, with
less tenderness of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy, of
rectitude, and integrity of mind, which her attentions, her
assiduities, her flatteries at the Park betrayed; and she could have no
lasting satisfaction in the company of a person who joined insincerity
with ignorance; whose want of instruction prevented their meeting in
conversation on terms of equality, and whose conduct toward others made
every show of attention and deference towards herself perfectly
valueless. Weston had scarcely finished his explanation of
Frank’s being a day before his time, and her father was yet in the
midst of his very civil welcome and congratulations, when she appeared,
to have her share of surprize, introduction, and pleasure. Knightley?—Who was so useful to him, who so ready to write his
letters, who so glad to assist him?—Who so cheerful, so attentive, so
attached to him?—Would not he like to have him always on the spot?—Yes. Knightley, she was
more conscience-stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had often
been.—Mr. I think Mr. Emma had never been to Box Hill; she wished to see
what every body found so well worth seeing, and she and Mr. I
shall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever I open my mouth,
shan’t I? Oh, for shame!—To be sure you must know
better than that. ‘My dear Courtland,’ said I, immediately throwing
them all into the fire, ‘do not adopt either of them, but by all means
build a cottage.’ And that I fancy, will be the end of it. Frank Churchill,” said Mr. How have
you been supported?”

“By feeling that I was doing my duty.—My promise to Lucy, obliged me to
be secret. She could not enter the house again, could not be in the same room to
which she had with such vain artifice retreated three months ago, to
lace up her boot, without _recollecting_. I never compliment. It seemed at first an accidental division, but it never
materially varied. ‘The consequence,’ said she, ‘has been a state of
perpetual suffering to me; and so it ought. Mr. Let me hear
     from you very soon. The Woodhouses were
first in consequence there. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there
ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it
seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice to
propriety, not a pleasure to himself. Mrs. Pray take
care, Miss Woodhouse, ours is rather a dark staircase—rather darker and
narrower than one could wish. 6_. Not one party, or scheme, or anything! How trifling they make
every thing else appear!—I feel now as if I could think of nothing but
these poor creatures all the rest of the day; and yet, who can say how
soon it may all vanish from my mind?”

“Very true,” said Harriet. “Upon my word, my dear, I do not know, for I never heard the subject
talked of.”

“But it is proved by the smallness of the school, which I have heard
you speak of, as under the patronage of your sister and Mrs. Not a soul of all my relations know of it but Anne,
and I never should have mentioned it to you, if I had not felt the
greatest dependence in the world upon your secrecy; and I really
thought my behaviour in asking so many questions about Mrs. and Mrs. Her ease and good
spirits increased. And I see very few pearls in the room except
mine.—So Frank Churchill is a capital dancer, I understand.—We shall
see if our styles suit.—A fine young man certainly is Frank Churchill. Jennings, when they
met at breakfast the following morning, “Sir John will not like leaving
Barton next week; ’tis a sad thing for sportsmen to lose a day’s
pleasure. Elton looked up to him. That is the
key to a great deal of capacity. But our visitor was very obstinate. poor woman,
who would have thought it!” and resolved, that his mourning should be
as handsome as possible; and his wife sat sighing and moralising over
her broad hems with a commiseration and good sense, true and steady. Gardiner
did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family;
Jane heard them with horror. Woodhouse, shaking his head and fixing his eyes on her
with tender concern.—The ejaculation in Emma’s ear expressed, “Ah! I could not give any connected detail
yesterday; but the suddenness, and, in one light, the unseasonableness
with which the affair burst out, needs explanation; for though the
event of the 26th ult., as you will conclude, immediately opened to me
the happiest prospects, I should not have presumed on such early
measures, but from the very particular circumstances, which left me not
an hour to lose. Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment. Sir John, who called on them more than once, brought home such accounts
of the favour they were in, as must be universally striking. “Not at all. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them
on her face with a calm unconcern, which was not in the least altered by
her communication. My dear Mr. But I knew I should
persuade you at last. impossible!”

“Indeed you did. Their road to this detached cottage was down Vicarage Lane, a lane
leading at right angles from the broad, though irregular, main street
of the place; and, as may be inferred, containing the blessed abode of
Mr. Suckling, who happens to be one of their nearest
neighbours. He may be very ‘amiable,’ have very good
manners, and be very agreeable; but he can have no English delicacy
towards the feelings of other people: nothing really amiable about
him.”

“You seem determined to think ill of him.”

“Me!—not at all,” replied Mr. Campbell will not be able to part with her at all. While you considered me as having sinned against Emma
Woodhouse, I could deserve nothing from either. He
must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found
her.”

“But does Lydia know nothing of this? Darcy’s
sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,
she turned up the lane which led her farther from the turnpike road. Mr. Like him, she had tried the scheme and rejected it; but such
an alternative as this had not occurred to her. Only half an hour before her
friend called for her at Mrs. Regard for my sister’s credit and feelings prevented any public
exposure; but I wrote to Mr. Her fortune was large, and our family estate much encumbered. The comfort to
_her_, of the regiment’s approaching removal, was indeed beyond
expression. Darcy soon drew the attention
of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and
the report, which was in general circulation within five minutes after
his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. I will have nothing to do
with it. Is he a man of fortune?”

“Yes; he has very good property in Dorsetshire.”

“I am glad of it. Mrs. Dashwood; she had never been used to
find wit in the inattention of any one, and could not help looking with
surprise at them both. Bingley, she could not make a very
favourable answer. Harris’s arrival, she set off, with her little boy and his
nurse, for the house of a near relation of Mr. I admire them much more if they are tall, straight, and
flourishing. and Mrs. I want to have your opinion of her looks. As the blow
was given, Emma felt that she could not now shew greater kindness than
in listening; and Harriet, unchecked, ran eagerly through what she had
to tell. Elizabeth was excessively disappointed: she had set her heart on seeing
the Lakes; and still thought there might have been time enough. And we will make the dear
little love some amends for her disappointment to-morrow, and then I
hope she will not much mind it.”

This hint was enough, Lucy recollected herself instantly and replied,
“Indeed you are very much mistaken, Lady Middleton; I am only waiting
to know whether you can make your party without me, or I should have
been at my filigree already. Elton?”

“Yes, all of us; Mrs. she _shall_ _not_ do such a thing again,” eagerly rejoined Mrs. The dews of a summer evening are what I would not expose any
body to. In
showing kindness to his cousins therefore he had the real satisfaction
of a good heart; and in settling a family of females only in his
cottage, he had all the satisfaction of a sportsman; for a sportsman,
though he esteems only those of his sex who are sportsmen likewise, is
not often desirous of encouraging their taste by admitting them to a
residence within his own manor. “’Tis twelve; I
shall not forget to think of you four hours hence; and by this time
to-morrow, perhaps, or a little later, I may be thinking of the
possibility of their all calling here. She gave a slight
glance round the table, and applied herself to it. Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. Palmer—“then it must be some other
place that is so pretty I suppose.”

When they were seated in the dining room, Sir John observed with regret
that they were only eight all together. Emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she had gone
to bed, more ready to see alleviations of the evil before her, and to
depend on getting tolerably out of it. At ten o’clock, she trusted, or at least not much later her
mother would be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which she must
now be travelling towards them. Had she tried to speak, or had she been
conscious of half Mrs. how do you
think I can live poking by myself, I who have been always used till
this winter to have Charlotte with me. The
expense shall not be thought of; and though he is so liberal, and so
fond of Jane that I dare say he would not mean to charge any thing for
attendance, we could not suffer it to be so, you know. Lady Lucas herself
has often said so, and envied me Jane’s beauty. In that, if in any thing, we may find an explanation.”

“It may be so; but Willoughby is capable—at least I think”—he stopped a
moment; then added in a voice which seemed to distrust itself, “And
your sister—how did she—”

“Her sufferings have been very severe. They sang together once more; and Emma would then resign her
place to Miss Fairfax, whose performance, both vocal and instrumental,
she never could attempt to conceal from herself, was infinitely
superior to her own. [Illustration:

“The officers of the ----shire”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

Mr. It might seem as if
she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Steele and Mr. That the hair
was her own, she instantaneously felt as well satisfied as Marianne;
the only difference in their conclusions was, that what Marianne
considered as a free gift from her sister, Elinor was conscious must
have been procured by some theft or contrivance unknown to herself. Weston’s, confirmed as it all was
by the words and the countenance of his wife, fewer and quieter, but
not less to the purpose. Mr. Have not I
some right to complain? my dear, but Perry had many doubts about the sea doing her any
good; and as to myself, I have been long perfectly convinced, though
perhaps I never told you so before, that the sea is very rarely of use
to any body. She tried to stop him; but vainly; he would go on, and say
it all. Wickham. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have
frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her
relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister’s
partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most
capable of engaging any woman’s heart. Dashwood, too happy to be
comfortable, knew not how to love Edward, nor praise Elinor enough, how
to be enough thankful for his release without wounding his delicacy,
nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained conversation
together, and yet enjoy, as she wished, the sight and society of both. Gardiner, a letter arrived for
their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. They called for him in their way; were all extremely
amused; and my brother asked him to dine with them the next day—which
he did—and in the course of that visit (as I understand) he found an
opportunity of speaking to Harriet; and certainly did not speak in
vain.—She made him, by her acceptance, as happy even as he is
deserving. Bates,) of restoring your spectacles,
healed for the present.”

He was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter; to escape a
little from the latter, he went to the pianoforte, and begged Miss
Fairfax, who was still sitting at it, to play something more. “Had you any idea,” cried Harriet, “of his being in love with her?—You,
perhaps, might.—You (blushing as she spoke) who can see into every
body’s heart; but nobody else—”

“Upon my word,” said Emma, “I begin to doubt my having any such talent. “You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew! Ferrars came to inspect the happiness which she was
almost ashamed of having authorised; and even the Dashwoods were at the
expense of a journey from Sussex to do them honour. Jane and I quite ready. The merest awkward
country girl, without style, or elegance, and almost without beauty. “Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Emma had hardly expected them: for Mr. Churchill; every body knows Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her Ladyship to take some
refreshment: but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,
declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,--

“Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness
on one side of your lawn. I can have no self-command without a
motive. I call it a very
fine country—the hills are steep, the woods seem full of fine timber,
and the valley looks comfortable and snug—with rich meadows and several
neat farm houses scattered here and there. My reproofs at Hunsford could not
work such a change as this. The wedding over, and the bride-people gone, her father
and herself were left to dine together, with no prospect of a third to
cheer a long evening. Philips, and was, by her watchfulness, most abundantly
supplied with coffee and muffin. She could not but smile to see the
graciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very person—for
Lucy was particularly distinguished—whom of all others, had they known
as much as she did, they would have been most anxious to mortify; while
she herself, who had comparatively no power to wound them, sat
pointedly slighted by both. Thus much for my general
intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views
were directed to Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I
assure you there are many amiable young women. My resolution was soon made, and at
eight o’clock this morning I was in my carriage. and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortunes with
contempt and ridicule.”

“And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,
“is your opinion of me! Knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the cure;—not like
Mr. That crime
has been the origin of every lesser one, and of all his present
discontents.”

Marianne assented most feelingly to the remark; and her mother was led
by it to an enumeration of Colonel Brandon’s injuries and merits, warm
as friendship and design could unitedly dictate. I
really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey. Knightley promises to give up his claim
this Christmas—though you know it is longer since they were with him,
than with us.”

“It would be very hard, indeed, my dear, if poor Isabella were to be
anywhere but at Hartfield.”

Mr. Can the old lady?”... Willoughby, he, whom only half an hour ago she had abhorred as the most
worthless of men, Willoughby, in spite of all his faults, excited a
degree of commiseration for the sufferings produced by them, which made
her think of him as now separated for ever from her family, with a
tenderness, a regret, rather in proportion, as she soon acknowledged
within herself—to his wishes than to his merits. She had heard, as soon as she got back to
Mrs. All was safe and prosperous; and as the removal of one
solicitude generally makes way for another, Emma, being now certain of
her ball, began to adopt as the next vexation Mr. All
Elizabeth’s anger against him had been long done away; but had she still
felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected
cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. Knightley particularly
delighted. “I am not fond of dinner-visiting,” said he—“I never was. He made her an offer in this very room,
and she refused him. Darcy took up a book. Every thing he said, was clever. But Mrs. The sudden termination of Colonel Brandon’s visit at the park, with his
steadiness in concealing its cause, filled the mind, and raised the
wonder of Mrs. “I perfectly agree with you, sir,”—was then his remark. Had
his character been known, this could not have happened. She must have a great deal to leave.”

“Nothing at all, I should rather suppose; for she has only her
jointure, which will descend to her children.”

“But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to her income. Woodhouse, a long, civil, ceremonious note, to say, with
Mr. My blindness to what was going
on, led me to act by them in a way that I must always be ashamed of,
and I was very foolishly tempted to say and do many things which may
well lay me open to unpleasant conjectures, but I have no other reason
to regret that I was not in the secret earlier.”

“Emma!” cried he, looking eagerly at her, “are you, indeed?”—but
checking himself—“No, no, I understand you—forgive me—I am pleased that
you can say even so much.—He is no object of regret, indeed! It was quite a
chance, he said, that he had not gone round by Randalls. “That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast, of my
present perfect indifference,” she continued, “I will farther tell you,
that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance, when I
did like him, when I was very much disposed to be attached to him—nay,
was attached—and how it came to cease, is perhaps the wonder. He
smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things. that’s a great pity; for I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, where the
waters do agree, it is quite wonderful the relief they give. You must go to bed early,
my dear—and I recommend a little gruel to you before you go.—You and I
will have a nice basin of gruel together. But I see what you mean. Bennet, “to walk
to Oakham Mount this morning. I thought it my duty as a friend, and
older than yourself, to say thus much to you. But on the following morning every hope of this
kind was done away. You really are a very sad girl, and do not know
how to take care of yourself.—To the post-office indeed! When the first transports
of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he
naturally returned to all his former indolence. But whether I should write
this apology, or deliver it in person, was a point of long debate. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my
dismission from your daughter’s lips instead of your own; but we are all
liable to error. Weston, as
he grew older—and even Mr. Tea was carrying round, and Mr. Ferrars is
told of it, for she was sent for as soon as ever my cousins left the
house, for your sister was sure _she_ would be in hysterics too; and so
she may, for what I care. Knightley.”

“Oh! Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor to be
calm. He cut her short with,

“I am going to Kingston. Elton’s looks also received the due share of censure. Wickham and herself. And I really believe he
_has_ the most delicate conscience in the world; the most scrupulous in
performing every engagement, however minute, and however it may make
against his interest or pleasure. It was all conjecture.”

“What is it you mean?”

“It is a circumstance which Darcy of course could not wish to be
generally known, because if it were to get round to the lady’s family it
would be an unpleasant thing.”

“You may depend upon my not mentioning it.”

“And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be
Bingley. Detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly
not in your inclination. what a delightful room this is! Ferrars.”

“Lord bless you, my dear! Willoughby much known in your part of Somersetshire?” said
Elinor. She did not fear her father’s opposition, but he was going to
be made unhappy, and that it should be through her means; that _she_,
his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be
filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her, was a wretched
reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. The moral will be perfectly fair. Well, I wish them happy with all my heart. But you had better go with Mrs. But really, ma’am, I think it would be very hard upon
younger sisters that they should not have their share of society and
amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to
marry early. “His aunt was so much better,
that he had not a doubt of getting over to them.”—Mrs. _Now_ especially there
cannot be—but however, you and Marianne were always great favourites. She took the first opportunity
of affronting her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking to her so
expressively of her brother’s great expectations, of Mrs. yes”—he replied; “I was just going to mention it. Your
reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: ‘Had you behaved in a
more gentlemanlike manner.’ Those were your words. But while she smiled at a graciousness so
misapplied, she could not reflect on the mean-spirited folly from which
it sprung, nor observe the studied attentions with which the Miss
Steeles courted its continuance, without thoroughly despising them all
four. Does
your charge give you much trouble? “Did you speak from your own observation,” said she, “when you told him
that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last spring?”

“From the former. You have proved
yourself, on the whole, less faulty than I had believed you. Mr. Frank Churchill, who is like nobody by his side. As he said this she could easily see that he had no doubt of a
favourable answer. My daughter and I are
both highly sensible of your goodness, and have the greatest
satisfaction in seeing you at Hartfield.”

The kind-hearted, polite old man might then sit down and feel that he
had done his duty, and made every fair lady welcome and easy. He was not hungry; it would only make him
hotter.” In two minutes, however, he relented in his own favour; and
muttering something about spruce-beer, walked off. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. Nothing wrong
in him escaped her. I treat you without ceremony,
Mr. He stopt at their gate. Elton would now be talked of no more. He is so droll! But they always do, you
know. Goddard’s that morning, and meeting
with Harriet and pleading his own cause, gave alarming ideas. Though I think
he had better not have married. Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged
thing in the world! John Knightley looked
at him with amazement, then shrugged his shoulders, and said, “I could
not have believed it even of _him_.”

Mr. Robinson’s asking him how he liked our Meryton
assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty
women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? Weston, her smile, her touch, her voice was
grateful to Emma, and she determined to think as little as possible of
Mr. Dashwood will
do very well.’”

“What! I won’t disturb her any
longer, for she had better have her cry out at once and have done with. The first, which was what her sister had sent him on
their arrival in town, was to this effect. Perry—how is he, sir?”

“Why, pretty well; but not quite well. But I do flatter
myself, my dear Jane, that my influence is not entirely worn out. Of their
personal charms he had not required a second interview to be convinced. Your daughter
Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after
her eldest sister has resigned it; and the chosen partner of her fate
may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages
in this land.’ Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this? What Lucy had asserted to
be true, therefore, Elinor could not, dared not longer doubt; supported
as it was too on every side by such probabilities and proofs, and
contradicted by nothing but her own wishes. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth’s
warm commendation of him, narrowly observed them both. Lucy was all exultation on being so honorably distinguished; and Miss
Steele wanted only to be teazed about Dr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation, that he
never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth,
by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she
had said enough to keep him quiet. Elton had been determined to go on, and had said in a _very_
_particular_ way indeed, that he was going on business which he would
not put off for any inducement in the world; and something about a very
enviable commission, and being the bearer of something exceedingly
precious. I have the highest
opinion in the world of Edward’s heart. Such I was, from eight to eight-and-twenty; and such I might
still have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! My Elinor, is it possible to doubt their engagement? It is impossible for _me_ to
be impartial. I heard from him just before I left Exeter;” taking a letter
from her pocket and carelessly showing the direction to Elinor. It was
all right, all open, all equal. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side; and though he
could not prevail with her to dance with him again, put it out of her
power to dance with others. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every
attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. “At this moment, perhaps, Mr. Poor, dear
child! You persuaded her to refuse him.”

“And if I did, (which, however, I am far from allowing) I should not
feel that I had done wrong. Woodhouse would be alarmed—she had better go;”—with most ready
encouragement from her friend, therefore, she passed off through
another door—and the moment she was gone, this was the spontaneous
burst of Emma’s feelings: “Oh God! The idea however started by her, was
immediately pursued by Colonel Brandon, who was on every occasion
mindful of the feelings of others; and much was said on the subject of
rain by both of them. Elton’s sanguine state of mind, he
tried to take her hand again, as he joyously exclaimed—

“Charming Miss Woodhouse! All connection
between us seemed now dissolved. Bingley arrived. ‘My dear,’ said I, ‘I shall say you are laid down
upon the bed:’ but, however, she is not; she is walking about the room. We will go to Hartfield afterwards. Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious
part of each was when the post was expected. Darcy?”

“Indeed I am. The day came, the party were punctually assembled, and Mr. Had you seen his look, his manner, had you heard his
voice at that moment! I have a little plan of
alteration for your bedrooms too, which may now be performed without
any inconvenience to any one. I will take my oath he never dropt a syllable of
being tired of her, or of wishing to marry Miss Morton, or any thing
like it. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. He has been here
this half hour, and master has had a letter.”

Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends--to his
tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Dashwood. “Oh! You will look back and see that I did not come
till Miss Fairfax was in Highbury; and as _you_ were the person
slighted, you will forgive me instantly; but I must work on my father’s
compassion, by reminding him, that so long as I absented myself from
his house, so long I lost the blessing of knowing you. She could not endure to give him the true
explanation; for though her suspicions were by no means removed, she
was really ashamed of having ever imparted them. Denny comes back from town.”

Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr. He has
encouragement enough to proceed, without our sighing out our souls over
this charade.”

“Oh! Weston, looking about. The
other is Miss De Bourgh. I told you he was
plain.”

“My dear, you said that Miss Campbell would not allow him to be plain,
and that you yourself—”

“Oh! “Going so soon!” said Marianne; “my dear Edward, this must not be.”

And drawing him a little aside, she whispered her persuasion that Lucy
could not stay much longer. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing
their wish of seeing Mr. She felt herself a most
fortunate woman; and she had lived long enough to know how fortunate
she might well be thought, where the only regret was for a partial
separation from friends whose friendship for her had never cooled, and
who could ill bear to part with her. He was wishing to confide in
her—perhaps to consult her;—cost her what it would, she would listen. And I need not bring the whole family, you know.”

Here Mr. “How nicely we are crammed in!” cried Lydia. Forster,” said she, “it will be quite shocking
to send her away! To hear those beautiful
lines which have frequently almost driven me wild, pronounced with such
impenetrable calmness, such dreadful indifference!”


“He would certainly have done more justice to simple and elegant prose. when should I ever have thought of putting by in cotton a
piece of court-plaister that Frank Churchill had been pulling about! But she had no reason to fear Mr. and it may be a very fortunate circumstance
for him, for Frank, I mean, that he should have attached himself to a
girl of such steadiness of character and good judgment as I have always
given her credit for—and still am disposed to give her credit for, in
spite of this one great deviation from the strict rule of right. Wickham immediately to
Elizabeth’s mind; and, from the observation of the day altogether, she
believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had represented. Richardson; and Elinor was left in possession of
knowledge which might feed her powers of reflection some time, though
she had learnt very little more than what had been already foreseen and
foreplanned in her own mind. Bennet, as the carriage drove up to
the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed,
anxious, uneasy. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Mr. How he lived, I
know not. Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of
spirits; and immediately accounting for it herself, by supposing that
she did not like to go home again so soon, she added,--

“But if that is the case, you must write to your mother to beg that you
may stay a little longer. Now I cannot say, that I
think you are any of you looking well at present.”

“I am sorry to hear you say so, sir; but I assure you, excepting those
little nervous head-aches and palpitations which I am never entirely
free from anywhere, I am quite well myself; and if the children were
rather pale before they went to bed, it was only because they were a
little more tired than usual, from their journey and the happiness of
coming. it is just as he chooses. But it is an excellent thing to have Frank among us
again, so near as town. Of breakfast she had been
kept by her fears, and of dinner by their sudden reverse, from eating
much;—and the present refreshment, therefore, with such feelings of
content as she brought to it, was particularly welcome. Her father had most cruelly mortified her by
what he said of Mr. Please to destroy my scrawls—but the ring with my hair you
are very welcome to keep.”

Elinor read and returned it without any comment. Barton Park was about half a mile from the cottage. _Now_ will you listen to me?”

Elinor bowed her assent. It
was natural to have some civil hopes on the subject, and he said,

“I hope you did not venture far, Miss Fairfax, this morning, or I am
sure you must have been wet.—We scarcely got home in time. They came. This was an affair,
however, of which Lady Middleton did not approve. Within
abundance of silver paper was a pretty little Tunbridge-ware box, which
Harriet opened: it was well lined with the softest cotton; but,
excepting the cotton, Emma saw only a small piece of court-plaister. From our relative situation, those attentions were her due, and
were felt to be so.—Whether Miss Woodhouse began really to understand
me before the expiration of that fortnight, I cannot say;—when I called
to take leave of her, I remember that I was within a moment of
confessing the truth, and I then fancied she was not without suspicion;
but I have no doubt of her having since detected me, at least in some
degree.—She may not have surmised the whole, but her quickness must
have penetrated a part. Darcy’s letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. I had not thought of Mrs. She had seen enough of her pride, her
meanness, and her determined prejudice against herself, to comprehend
all the difficulties that must have perplexed the engagement, and
retarded the marriage, of Edward and herself, had he been otherwise
free; and she had seen almost enough to be thankful for her _own_ sake,
that one greater obstacle preserved her from suffering under any other
of Mrs. But if you will listen to his letter, you may, perhaps, be a little
softened by his manner of expressing himself.”

“No, that I am sure I shall not: and I think it was very impertinent of
him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I did not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it; I
believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. ‘My dear,’
said I, ‘you will blind yourself’—for tears were in her eyes
perpetually. In a few days more, we
may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married,
and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as
lost. Elton,
though she had always considered the ball as peculiarly for her. Will you be so good as to tell him that the living of
Delaford, now just vacant, as I am informed by this day’s post, is his,
if he think it worth his acceptance; but _that_, perhaps, so
unfortunately circumstanced as he is now, it may be nonsense to appear
to doubt; I only wish it were more valuable. The latter was
thinking only of his breakfast. Well, said I, all I can say is,
that if this be true, he has used a young lady of my acquaintance
abominably ill, and I wish with all my soul his wife may plague his
heart out. Do not you, Darcy?”

“My style of writing is very different from yours.”

“Oh,” cried Miss Bingley, “Charles writes in the most careless way
imaginable. The journey would, moreover, give
her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have
been very sorry for any delay. Palmer. Do not let me be pained by hearing any thing more on the
subject.”

“I insist on you hearing the whole of it,” he replied, “My fortune was
never large, and I had always been expensive, always in the habit of
associating with people of better income than myself. I remember it perfectly. A long time, is not it, for a cold to hang upon her? Forster called her, and they were going to the
camp; and from her correspondence with her sister there was still less
to be learnt, for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much
too full of lines under the words to be made public. Darcy was really the
object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her
estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that
his affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many
months’ suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities,
she did conquer her father’s incredulity, and reconcile him to the
match. Jennings was kept
away by the indisposition of her youngest daughter; and for this party,
Marianne, wholly dispirited, careless of her appearance, and seeming
equally indifferent whether she went or staid, prepared, without one
look of hope or one expression of pleasure. The same books, the same passages were idolized by each—or if
any difference appeared, any objection arose, it lasted no longer than
till the force of her arguments and the brightness of her eyes could be
displayed. And then there was such comfort in the very easy distance
of Randalls from Hartfield, so convenient for even solitary female
walking, and in Mr. Cole of
it, she sat down and wrote to me. And your brother and sister were not very kind! It was very natural for you to say, what
right has he to lecture me?—and I am afraid very natural for you to
feel that it was done in a disagreeable manner. Jenkinson, in whose appearance
there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening
to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before
her eyes. Ferrars would be off; and when Edward did not come near us
for three days, I could not tell what to think myself; and I believe in
my heart Lucy gave it up all for lost; for we came away from your
brother’s Wednesday, and we saw nothing of him not all Thursday,
Friday, and Saturday, and did not know what was become of him. I hope you like your house, Miss
Marianne. Martin’s interest in view? I will not spend _my_ hours in
running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back
again.”

“Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait
on him. Do but consider,
my dear Mr. We had great amusement with those letters
one morning. I cannot help suspecting him. Four nieces
of Mrs. South End is an unhealthy place. Mrs. Do you
know Mr. Collins, in return
for his last. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I
am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.”

Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth
tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. Very early in April, and tolerably early in the day, the two parties
from Hanover Square and Berkeley Street set out from their respective
homes, to meet, by appointment, on the road. And there can be no reason why you should not
try for him. I am
sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say
nothing _he_ may not like to hear.”

“For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. Churchill had been promising a
visit the last ten years. Jennings, left her own party for a short time, to join their’s. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great
politeness by the whole family. Younger sons cannot marry
where they like.”

“Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often
do.”

“Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not many in
my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to
money.”

“Is this,” thought Elizabeth, “meant for me?” and she coloured at the
idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, “And pray, what is
the usual price of an earl’s younger son? You had better come earlier another time, because we are
generally out by one. She had even condescended to advise him to
marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had
once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly
approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed
to suggest some herself,--some shelves in the closets upstairs. Darcy liked me
less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father’s uncommon
attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. But I thought, at the time, that you
would most likely change your mind when it came to the point. You, (to Emma), I am certain, will never
guess.—I will tell you.—M. [Illustration: M^{r.} & M^{rs.} Bennet

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




[Illustration:

“I hope Mr. Her Bath habits made evening-parties
perfectly natural to her, and Maple Grove had given her a taste for
dinners. Gilbert
would have danced the other evening, if she had been asked. Others even arose to confirm it. I took him as he was sleeping on
the sofa, and it is as strong a likeness of his cockade as you would
wish to see. all alone! Miss Bingley was
then sorry that she had proposed the delay; for her jealousy and dislike
of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other. While poor Mrs. She was reminded, more than once, of
having always said she would never marry, and assured that it would be
a great deal better for her to remain single; and told of poor
Isabella, and poor Miss Taylor.—But it would not do. Elton. And
how much may be said in her situation for even that error!”

“Much, indeed!” cried Emma feelingly. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but
I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. Bennet,” cried his wife, “what are you
talking of? This lady was one of my nearest relations, an orphan
from her infancy, and under the guardianship of my father. You saw what she said. Her hair so untidy, so blowzy!”

“Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep
in mud, I am absolutely certain, and the gown which had been let down to
hide it not doing its office.”

“Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,” said Bingley; “but this was
all lost upon me. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can
think anything wanting. Knightley’s; for Mr. Kitty and Lydia take
his defection much more to heart than I do. She was as
handsome a girl last September, as I ever saw; and as likely to attract
the man. “For we must attribute this happy conclusion,” she added, “in a great
measure to his kindness. Collins’s happiness; and that in speaking of
Rosings, and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to
expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying
_there_ too. I thought of
nothing but whether it might not be Colonel Brandon come back again; so
I said to Sir John, I do think I hear a carriage; perhaps it is Colonel
Brandon come back again—”

Elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle of her story, to
receive the rest of the party; Lady Middleton introduced the two
strangers; Mrs. “This is a pleasure,” said he, in rather a low voice, “coming at least
ten minutes earlier than I had calculated. I dare say the
lace upon Mrs. This was the
knowledge of herself, on the first question of inquiry, which she
reached; and without being long in reaching it.—She was most
sorrowfully indignant; ashamed of every sensation but the one revealed
to her—her affection for Mr. _I_ long to inquire; and how will
_my_ interference be borne.”

She determined, after some consideration, that if appearances continued
many days longer as unpleasant as they now were, she would represent in
the strongest manner to her mother the necessity of some serious
enquiry into the affair. If
the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other, or
ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the
least. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister’s proficiency. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your
declaration affected me in any other way than as it spared me the
concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a
more gentlemanlike manner.”

She saw him start at this; but he said nothing, and she continued,--

“You could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way
that would have tempted me to accept it.”

Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an
expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. I was
desired to say so from both. “Of _one_ thing, my dear sister,” kindly taking her hand, and speaking
in an awful whisper, “I may assure you;—and I _will_ do it, because I
know it must gratify you. Marianne’s pianoforte was unpacked and properly
disposed of; and Elinor’s drawings were affixed to the walls of their
sitting room. [Illustration]

When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as
much as possible against Mr. Do
not you see that, at this instant, the very passage of her own letter,
which sent me the report, is passing under her eye—that the whole
blunder is spread before her—that she can attend to nothing else,
though pretending to listen to the others?”

Jane was forced to smile completely, for a moment; and the smile partly
remained as she turned towards him, and said in a conscious, low, yet
steady voice,

“How you can bear such recollections, is astonishing to me!—They _will_
sometimes obtrude—but how you can court them!”

He had a great deal to say in return, and very entertainingly; but
Emma’s feelings were chiefly with Jane, in the argument; and on leaving
Randalls, and falling naturally into a comparison of the two men, she
felt, that pleased as she had been to see Frank Churchill, and really
regarding him as she did with friendship, she had never been more
sensible of Mr. Alas! In that
county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three
weeks; and to Mrs. Weston
had not a lively concern; and half an hour’s uninterrupted
communication of all those little matters on which the daily happiness
of private life depends, was one of the first gratifications of each. These
were the contents:--

     /* NIND “My dear Harriet, */

     “You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help
     laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am
     missed. But if I go on I shall displease you by saying what I
think of persons you esteem. There go you and your riddle-book one of these
days.”—Harriet’s was—

“Oh, what a sweet house!—How very beautiful!—There are the yellow
curtains that Miss Nash admires so much.”

“I do not often walk this way _now_,” said Emma, as they proceeded,
“but _then_ there will be an inducement, and I shall gradually get
intimately acquainted with all the hedges, gates, pools and pollards of
this part of Highbury.”

Harriet, she found, had never in her life been inside the Vicarage, and
her curiosity to see it was so extreme, that, considering exteriors and
probabilities, Emma could only class it, as a proof of love, with Mr. Of his former way of life,
nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told

[Illustration:

     “Meeting accidentally in Town”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

himself. He perfectly knew his own meaning; and
having warmly protested against her suspicion as most injurious, and
slightly touched upon his respect for Miss Smith as her friend,—but
acknowledging his wonder that Miss Smith should be mentioned at all,—he
resumed the subject of his own passion, and was very urgent for a
favourable answer. “And you really are not engaged to him!” said she. Her keenest attention was awakened: she longed to hear more; and was
grateful to her uncle for saying,--

“There are very few people of whom so much can be said. “Indeed, the truth was, that poor dear Jane could not bear to see any
body—any body at all—Mrs. it _did_ torture me. Some might think him,
and others might think her, the most in luck. He was her dear Wickham on every
occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. dear, I thought it would have been the death of me! She
understood it all; and as far as her mind could disengage itself from
the injustice and selfishness of angry feelings, she acknowledged that
Jane Fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond her
desert. It was first broken by Mrs. Elton; “_I_
really cannot attempt—I am not at all fond of the sort of thing. Not a creature knowing it but
themselves—neither the Campbells, nor her family, nor his.—It is so
wonderful, that though perfectly convinced of the fact, it is yet
almost incredible to myself. Darcy
invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he
chose, while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same
time to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of
the stream where there was usually most sport. It is a
dreadful thing to have you forced to live there! He is of no profession at all.”

“Margaret,” said Marianne with great warmth, “you know that all this is
an invention of your own, and that there is no such person in
existence.”

“Well, then, he is lately dead, Marianne, for I am sure there was such
a man once, and his name begins with an F.”

Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for observing, at this
moment, “that it rained very hard,” though she believed the
interruption to proceed less from any attention to her, than from her
ladyship’s great dislike of all such inelegant subjects of raillery as
delighted her husband and mother. I would not have you
suffer on my account; for I assure you I no longer suffer materially
myself. Miss Fairfax, you must not run such risks.—Liable
as you have been to severe colds, indeed you ought to be particularly
careful, especially at this time of year. yes, I observed it, I assure you. I have done with you from this very day. I never heard of such a thing. What a softener of the heart
was this persuasion! I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have
seen it in the papers. I knew how soon he would come.”

She walked eagerly on as she spoke; and Elinor, to screen Marianne from
particularity, as she felt almost certain of its not being Willoughby,
quickened her pace and kept up with her. Poor
Edward! Can it be Neptune? If she could not have been angry
with Frank Churchill too, it would have been dreadful.—As for Jane
Fairfax, she might at least relieve her feelings from any present
solicitude on her account. But now, poor girl, her peace is cut up for some time. They were excessively sorry to go! The interest of two thousand pounds—how can a man live on
it?—and when to that is added the recollection, that he might, but for
his own folly, within three months have been in the receipt of two
thousand, five hundred a-year (for Miss Morton has thirty thousand
pounds,) I cannot picture to myself a more wretched condition. “There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after a
pause, “who more particularly wishes to be known to you. We do not suffer by accident. Her views of improving her little friend’s mind, by a great deal of
useful reading and conversation, had never yet led to more than a few
first chapters, and the intention of going on to-morrow. Weston. “You had better order the carriage directly, my love,” said she; “I
dare say we shall be able to get along, if we set off directly; and if
we do come to any thing very bad, I can get out and walk. Hodges, he said, was quite displeased at their being all sent
away. That was a great deal too smart for me. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too
much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord,
how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn. Both changed colour,
one looked white, the other red. Lady
Catherine de Bourgh’s attention to his wishes, and consideration for his
comfort, appeared very remarkable. We are so very airy! The manner,
perhaps, may have as little to recommend them. a smart, stylish
girl they say, but not handsome. With a triumphant smile, they were told, that it was ten
miles round. I write rather slowly.”

“How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a
year! You had,
somehow or other, broken bounds yesterday, and run away from your own
management; but to-day you are got back again—and as I cannot be always
with you, it is best to believe your temper under your own command
rather than mine.”

“It comes to the same thing. He quitted the militia and
engaged in trade, having brothers already established in a good way in
London, which afforded him a favourable opening. The garden sloping to the
road, the house standing in it, the green pales and the laurel hedge,
everything declared they were arriving. You told me to observe him carefully, and let his behaviour be
the rule of mine—and so I have. Palmer, in her way, was equally angry. You must have known, that while you were enjoying yourself in
Devonshire pursuing fresh schemes, always gay, always happy, she was
reduced to the extremest indigence.”

“But, upon my soul, I did _not_ know it,” he warmly replied; “I did not
recollect that I had omitted to give her my direction; and common sense
might have told her how to find it out.”

“Well, sir, and what said Mrs. _She_ was not present when the
suspicion first arose. She came in with a smile, smiled
all the time of her visit, except when she laughed, and smiled when she
went away. You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?”

“Blame you! I am
persuaded that Mrs. I know that such a girl as Harriet is exactly what every man
delights in—what at once bewitches his senses and satisfies his
judgment. Frank Churchill again. “I know very well, madam,” said he, “that when persons sit down to a
card table they must take their chance of these things,--and happily I
am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. He said as little as he had ever been in the
habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him
away; and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of
it. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and
shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres. It
is such a happiness when good people get together—and they always do. Pratt’s, near Plymouth. We three shall be
able to go very well in my chaise; and when we are in town, if you do
not like to go wherever I do, well and good, you may always go with one
of my daughters. It seems a hopeless business.”

“Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Oh no! But I know very well what it is; and I know
where he is too.”

“Yes, yes, we can guess where he is; at his own house at Norland to be
sure. Ferrars looked exceedingly angry, and drawing herself up more
stiffly than ever, pronounced in retort this bitter philippic, “Miss
Morton is Lord Morton’s daughter.”

Fanny looked very angry too, and her husband was all in a fright at his
sister’s audacity. The next was in these words:--“‘I do not pretend to
regret anything I shall leave in Hertfordshire except your society, my
dearest friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many
returns of that delightful intercourse we have known, and in the
meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most
unreserved correspondence. Mr. Elinor’s lips
had moved with her mother’s, and, when the moment of action was over,
she wished that she had shaken hands with him too. On opening the door, she
perceived her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as
if engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion,
the faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each
other, would have told it all. Her astonishment and confusion were
very great on his so sudden appearance. Weston, does come and see us pretty
often—but then—she is always obliged to go away again.”

“It would be very hard upon Mr. It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to influence his
schemes; but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth, it
had not shaken his determination of never settling till he could
purchase Randalls, and the sale of Randalls was long looked forward to;
but he had gone steadily on, with these objects in view, till they were
accomplished. She calls you, Knightley—what can she do for Mr. It is the very last thing I would stand the brunt
of just now. Mrs. Collins would have led them round his two meadows;
but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white
frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte
took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,
probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband’s
help. Weston was alone in the drawing-room:—but hardly had
they been told of the baby, and Mr. As they passed through the hall,
Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and
drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be
decent-looking rooms, walked on. “Is anything the matter with her?” cried Mrs. It would have killed me
never to come to Hartfield any more!”

“Dear affectionate creature!—_You_ banished to Abbey-Mill Farm!—_You_
confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life! Woodhouse’s giving a gentle sigh,
and saying, “Ah, poor Miss Taylor! They must be
separated; but there was a great deal of pain in the process—so much to
herself at this time, that she soon felt the necessity of a little
consolation, and resolved on going home by way of Randalls to procure
it. Jennings deficient either in curiosity after
petty information, or in a disposition to communicate it. Woodhouse at last was off; but Mr. I have been a disappointed man, and
my spirits will not bear solitude. She could see
nothing but evil in it. Had she not seen him in
Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no
other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial
to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming
there _with_ his friend’s permission, or being bold enough to come
without it. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a
little by starting the idea of his

[Illustration:

     “When the Party entered”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball; and a
report soon followed that Mr. One cannot creep upon a journey; one cannot help
getting on faster than one has planned; and the pleasure of coming in
upon one’s friends before the look-out begins, is worth a great deal
more than any little exertion it needs.”

“It is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it,” said the young
man, “though there are not many houses that I should presume on so far;
but in coming _home_ I felt I might do any thing.”

The word _home_ made his father look on him with fresh complacency. Circumstances that might swell to half an hour’s
relation, and contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen them, had
passed undiscerned by her who now heard them; but the two latest
occurrences to be mentioned, the two of strongest promise to Harriet,
were not without some degree of witness from Emma herself.—The first,
was his walking with her apart from the others, in the lime-walk at
Donwell, where they had been walking some time before Emma came, and he
had taken pains (as she was convinced) to draw her from the rest to
himself—and at first, he had talked to her in a more particular way
than he had ever done before, in a very particular way indeed!—(Harriet
could not recall it without a blush.) He seemed to be almost asking
her, whether her affections were engaged.—But as soon as she (Miss
Woodhouse) appeared likely to join them, he changed the subject, and
began talking about farming:—The second, was his having sat talking
with her nearly half an hour before Emma came back from her visit, the
very last morning of his being at Hartfield—though, when he first came
in, he had said that he could not stay five minutes—and his having told
her, during their conversation, that though he must go to London, it
was very much against his inclination that he left home at all, which
was much more (as Emma felt) than he had acknowledged to _her_. He could
now, without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise, without a
glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest, give way to all
his natural kind-hearted civility in solicitous inquiries after Mr. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from
surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party,
and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least
of perfect civility. “Marianne can never keep long from that instrument you know, ma’am,”
said Elinor, endeavouring to smooth away the offence; “and I do not
much wonder at it; for it is the very best toned piano-forte I ever
heard.”

The remaining five were now to draw their cards. She will never submit to any thing requiring
industry and patience, and a subjection of the fancy to the
understanding. He was a blessing to all the juvenile part
of the neighbourhood, for in summer he was for ever forming parties to
eat cold ham and chicken out of doors, and in winter his private balls
were numerous enough for any young lady who was not suffering under the
unsatiable appetite of fifteen. The apples
themselves are the very finest sort for baking, beyond a doubt; all
from Donwell—some of Mr. His mother and sisters were very fond of him. It seemed too precious an offering for any degree
of publicity. He proved to
me that he could afford it; and that being the case, I was convinced he
could not do better. Poor girl! CHAPTER V. Twice every year these annuities were to be
paid; and then there was the trouble of getting it to them; and then
one of them was said to have died, and afterwards it turned out to be
no such thing. I was once very near—and I wish I had—it
would have been better. But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom
they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking
with an officer on the other side of the way. Are no probabilities to be accepted, merely
because they are not certainties? He put down his gun and ran to her assistance. His heart was softened in seeing mine suffer; and so much of his
ill-will was done away, that when we parted, he almost shook me by the
hand while he reminded me of an old promise about a pointer puppy. Bingley must be down again in the summer. “You were speaking,” said he, gravely. Dashwood’s spirit overcame the
wish of society for her children; and she was resolute in declining to
visit any family beyond the distance of a walk. A boyish scheme, indeed!—I cannot comprehend a man’s wishing
to give a woman any proof of affection which he knows she would rather
dispense with; and he did know that she would have prevented the
instrument’s coming if she could.”

After this, he made some progress without any pause. Weston’s arguments against herself. I
have no notion of men’s going on in this way; and if ever I meet him
again, I will give him such a dressing as he has not had this many a
day. Elton, who can
have thought of it as I have done?”

“But you have not seen so much of the world as I have. The letters from town, which a few days before would have made every
nerve in Elinor’s body thrill with transport, now arrived to be read
with less emotion than mirth. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father
     was still with him, but would quit town the next morning. Elinor resolving to exert herself, though fearing the sound of her own
voice, now said,

“Is Mrs. On this article I can fully acquit
him. And to be kept back on _such_ a motive! Collins invited them to take a stroll in the
garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of
which he attended himself. Your exclamation is very
natural.”

Marianne was going to retort, but she remembered her promises, and
forbore. Oh! As yet she
cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard, nor of its
reasonableness. She opened
the door, and met Maria in the landing-place, who, breathless with
agitation, cried out,--

[Illustration:

     “In Conversation with the ladies”

[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]]

“Oh, my dear Eliza! Here
are seven of you, besides myself, (who, she is pleased to say, am very
entertaining already,) and she only demands from each of you either one
thing very clever, be it prose or verse, original or repeated—or two
things moderately clever—or three things very dull indeed, and she
engages to laugh heartily at them all.”

“Oh! If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him,
_he_ was the cause--his pride and caprice were the cause--of all that
Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. Wickham and the
officers, Mr. Mrs. Every thing was silent; this could
not be borne many seconds; she opened the door, advanced a few steps
towards the stairs, and after listening half a minute, returned into
the room in all the agitation which a conviction of having heard him
would naturally produce; in the ecstasy of her feelings at that instant
she could not help exclaiming, “Oh, Elinor, it is Willoughby, indeed it
is!” and seemed almost ready to throw herself into his arms, when
Colonel Brandon appeared. Jennings’s
prophecies, though rather jumbled together, were chiefly fulfilled; for
she was able to visit Edward and his wife in their Parsonage by
Michaelmas, and she found in Elinor and her husband, as she really
believed, one of the happiest couples in the world. Elton. Palmer, on the contrary, who was strongly endowed by nature with a
turn for being uniformly civil and happy, was hardly seated before her
admiration of the parlour and every thing in it burst forth. I believe I have been wrong in
saying so much, but I hardly know what to do, and on your prudence I
have the strongest dependence. Bennet. Though Darcy could never
receive _him_ at Pemberley, yet, for Elizabeth’s sake, he assisted him
further in his profession. I can think of but one thing—Who is in love with her? Ford. Elton had most
kindly sent Jane a note, or we should have been.—But two such offers in
one day!—Never were such neighbours. Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with
her two elder sisters. And she is a good-natured woman after all. I hope it is not to say that your sister is
worse.”

“No, ma’am. and his
answering immediately to the last question, ‘Oh, the eldest Miss Bennet,
beyond a doubt: there cannot be two opinions on that point.’”

“Upon my word! Marianne’s indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted the room; and
as her vehemence made reserve impossible in Elinor, and unnecessary in
Mrs. But I shall see
them tomorrow.”

“It would be unnecessary I am sure, for you to caution Mrs. Cole’s carriage-horses returning from exercise, or a
stray letter-boy on an obstinate mule, were the liveliest objects she
could presume to expect; and when her eyes fell only on the butcher
with his tray, a tidy old woman travelling homewards from shop with her
full basket, two curs quarrelling over a dirty bone, and a string of
dawdling children round the baker’s little bow-window eyeing the
gingerbread, she knew she had no reason to complain, and was amused
enough; quite enough still to stand at the door. His good-nature, his humanity, as I tell you, would
be quite enough to account for the horses. ‘Have you, upon your honour?’ said she; ‘well, that is
quite unexpected. Something, he supposed, might be
attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so
much attention in the whole course of his life. When he was speaking of it in that way, I honestly said that _the_
_world_ I could give up—parties, balls, plays—for I had no fear of
retirement. She is playing _Robin_ _Adair_ at this
moment—_his_ favourite.”

Shortly afterwards Miss Bates, passing near the window, descried Mr. Hurst and
Elizabeth herself. A lively imagination soon settled it all. They were all three walking about
together for an hour or two—first round the shrubberies of Hartfield,
and afterwards in Highbury. do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax’s
sensations from you, or from any body else. But at
present there was nothing more to be said. Weston would undoubtedly support me, if he were here, for he
thinks exactly as I do on the subject. And he wrote as if he really loved her
very much—but she did not know—and so, she was come as fast as she
could to ask Miss Woodhouse what she should do.—” Emma was half-ashamed
of her friend for seeming so pleased and so doubtful. Smith are
never repeated within the twelvemonth.”

“And is Mrs. “But, my dear, pray do not
make any more matches; they are silly things, and break up one’s family
circle grievously.”

“Only one more, papa; only for Mr. Mrs. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly
superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced
almost to London, but not beyond: they are certainly not gone to
Scotland.”

“And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?”

“My father has gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle’s
immediate assistance, and we shall be off, I hope, in half an hour. Weston,” said Emma triumphantly when he left them, “what do
you say now to Mr. They had in fact
nothing to wish for, but the marriage of Colonel Brandon and Marianne,
and rather better pasturage for their cows. An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed,
from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to Scotland
with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the Middletons, that,
though not much in the habit of giving anything, they determined to
give them—a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began, invited
them to dine in Harley Street, where they had taken a very good house
for three months. I cannot at all consent to Mr. The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Since her father’s death her
home has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her
education.”

After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not
help reverting once more to the first, and saying,--

“I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. The very want of
such equality might prevent his perception of it; but he must know that
in fortune and consequence she was greatly his superior. Palmer himself, as, joined to the very great amendment of his
manners towards them since her sister had been known to be unhappy,
induced her to accept it with pleasure. I planned the
match from that hour; and when such success has blessed me in this
instance, dear papa, you cannot think that I shall leave off
match-making.”

“I do not understand what you mean by ‘success,’” said Mr. Ford.—“Yes—no—yes, to Mrs. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? “And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?”

“I hope not.”

“It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion,
to be secure of judging properly at first.”

“May I ask to what these questions tend?”

“Merely to the illustration of _your_ character,” said she, endeavouring
to shake off her gravity. There
is no reason on earth why Mr. Weston
to come with me, that I might be sure of succeeding.”

“I hope Mrs. She comes to us to-day. Woodhouse, whose
thoughts were on the Bates’s, said—

“It is a great pity that their circumstances should be so confined! She seems perfectly happy, however; and, in a
prudential light, it is certainly a very good match for her.”

“It must be very agreeable to her to be settled within so easy a
distance of her own family and friends.”

“An easy distance do you call it? He might observe that it was so. Elton’s seeing ready wit in her. Harriet
had no penetration. From you, from my home, I shall never
again have the smallest incitement to move; and if I do mix in other
society, it will be only to show that my spirit is humbled, my heart
amended, and that I can practise the civilities, the lesser duties of
life, with gentleness and forbearance. She would not be frightened from paying him those attentions which, as
a friend and almost a relation, were his due, by the observant eyes of
Lucy, though she soon perceived them to be narrowly watching her. My mother was quite sick of it. madam,” cried Emma, “if other children are at all like what I
remember to have been myself, I should think five times the amount of
what I have ever yet heard named as a salary on such occasions, dearly
earned.”

“You are so noble in your ideas!”

“And when is Miss Fairfax to leave you?”

“Very soon, very soon, indeed; that’s the worst of it. But, Lizzy! It was censure in common use,
and easily given. She is a relation of the Colonel’s, my dear; a
very near relation. But at last there seemed a perverse turn; it seemed all at once as if
he were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account, than
on Harriet’s—more anxious that she should escape the infection, than
that there should be no infection in the complaint. My sister will be equally sorry to miss the
pleasure of seeing you; but she has been very much plagued lately with
nervous head-aches, which make her unfit for company or conversation.”

“Oh, dear, that is a great pity! _You_
think it a faithful portrait, undoubtedly.”

“I must not decide on my own performance.”

He made no answer; and they were again silent till they had gone down
the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often
walk to Meryton. Yes, I call it a very easy distance.”

“I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_
of the match,” cried Elizabeth. Do you think I am right?”

“Perfectly, perfectly right, my dearest Harriet; you are doing just
what you ought. Elton. Jennings was a widow with an ample jointure. Gardiner would be prevented by business from
setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again
within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so
far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with
the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up
the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour; and, according to the
present plan, were to go no farther northward than Derbyshire. She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella’s invitation; and she was
fortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking it, without
resorting to invention.—There was a tooth amiss. Collins; and whatever might be his feelings towards her
friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Apologies for her seemingly ungracious silence in their first
reception, and the warmest expressions of the gratitude she was always
feeling towards herself and Mr. Churchill’s account—she has not been well the
whole winter, and thinks Enscombe too cold for her—so they are all to
move southward without loss of time.”

“Indeed!—from Yorkshire, I think. Anne
and me are to go the latter end of January to some relations who have
been wanting us to visit them these several years! “By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; I
wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my
head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of
admiration to so great a man, and yet that he should look at her because
he disliked her was still more strange. Selina, who is mild almost to a fault, bore with them
much better.”

While she talked of his son, Mr. Weston were soon
out of the house together and on their way at a quick pace for
Randalls. Once, I felt the fire rather too much; but then I
moved back my chair a little, a very little, and it did not disturb me. When your father and mother moved to Norland,
though the furniture of Stanhill was sold, all the china, plate, and
linen was saved, and is now left to your mother. Bates was engaged to
spend the evening at Hartfield, James had due notice, and he sanguinely
hoped that neither dear little Henry nor dear little John would have
any thing the matter with them, while dear Emma were gone. Collins then returned to Elizabeth. If their
praise is censure, your censure may be praise, for they are not more
undiscerning, than you are prejudiced and unjust.”

“In defence of your _protégé_ you can even be saucy.”

“My _protégé_, as you call him, is a sensible man; and sense will
always have attractions for me. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he
may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.”

“But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. So she thought
at first;—but a little consideration convinced her that every thing
need not be put off. Mr. Knightley took
charge of Miss Bates and Jane; and Emma and Harriet belonged to Frank
Churchill. Not the
smallest suspicion, therefore, had ever occurred to prepare him for
what followed;—and when at last it burst on him in a letter from Lucy
herself, he had been for some time, he believed, half stupified between
the wonder, the horror, and the joy of such a deliverance. Yes. CHAPTER XXVI. “Cannot you, my dear Emma—cannot you form a guess as to what you are to
hear?”

“So far as that it relates to Mr. “Aye, do, Frank.—Go and fetch Miss Bates, and let us end the matter at
once. _Now_, indeed it would be too late to sell it, but a
man of Colonel Brandon’s sense! I seem to have been distressing you
for nothing. Other schemes, too, came into her head. Lady Middleton frequently
called him to order, wondered how any one’s attention could be diverted
from music for a moment, and asked Marianne to sing a particular song
which Marianne had just finished. Absence, with the conviction probably of her indifference, had
produced this very natural and very desirable effect. “He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we travelled. This she would not hear of; but she was not so
unwilling to comply with their brother’s proposal; and it was settled
that Mr. All her impatience to be at home again now returned; her mother was
dearer to her than ever; dearer through the very excess of her mistaken
confidence in Willoughby, and she was wildly urgent to be gone. At length she spoke
again. How she should begin—how she should express herself in her note to
Edward, was now all her concern. Elton hardly
waited for the affirmative before she went on. After this
period, every appearance of acquaintance was dropped. Not heard of you!—I believe Mrs. is Knightley’s right hand.”

Emma would not have smiled for the world, and only said, “Is Mr. Mrs. You would rob it of its simplicity by imaginary
improvement! Dear Emma has been to call on Mrs. They must have seen them together for ever.”

“Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality,
especially on Lydia’s side, but nothing to give him any alarm. In
confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary
transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming
her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on. My first care, when I _did_ arrive, was of course to seek
for her; but the search was as fruitless as it was melancholy. I think there is a little likeness between us.”

He bowed. She vowed at first she
would never trim me up a new bonnet, nor do any thing else for me
again, so long as she lived; but now she is quite come to, and we are
as good friends as ever. “I do not offer it for Miss Smith’s collection,” said he. I
thought it must be so. “I never should have presumed to think of it at first,” said she, “but
for you. He went to town on business three days ago,
and I got him to take charge of some papers which I was wanting to send
to John.—He delivered these papers to John, at his chambers, and was
asked by him to join their party the same evening to Astley’s. Quite wonderful how she does her
hair!—No hairdresser from London I think could.—Ah! Surely, after doing so, she cannot be imagined liable
to any impression of sorrow or of joy on his account: she cannot be
interested in any thing that befalls him. I am determined against all interference. Knightley, a word or two more, and I have done. “We are sure of excellent fires,” continued he, “and every thing in the
greatest comfort. for the very moment Mr. His tall, firm, upright figure, among the bulky forms
and stooping shoulders of the elderly men, was such as Emma felt must
draw every body’s eyes; and, excepting her own partner, there was not
one among the whole row of young men who could be compared with him.—He
moved a few steps nearer, and those few steps were enough to prove in
how gentlemanlike a manner, with what natural grace, he must have
danced, would he but take the trouble.—Whenever she caught his eye, she
forced him to smile; but in general he was looking grave. What
can be the meaning of it? But what is that to me? Knightley is so very fine a man!”

“Mr. Jennings, and of every
wealthy friend. Jennings, I had repaid with ungrateful contempt. A
_small_ half-glass, put into a tumbler of water? Give my love to Colonel Forster. Knightley;—and till she is in being, I will manage such
matters myself.”

“Ah! Elton, papa,—I must look about for a wife for him. are you there?—But you are miserably behindhand. But Lady
Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most
gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty
to them. Isabella
does not seem more my sister; has never excited a greater interest;
perhaps hardly so great. “Such sweet lines!” continued Harriet—“these two last!—But how shall I
ever be able to return the paper, or say I have found it out?—Oh! And who but Mr. Is it true?”

Elizabeth replied that it was. He had given it, he could assure her, very long and calm
consideration; he had been walking away from William Larkins the whole
morning, to have his thoughts to himself. there is such an expression of goodness in his
countenance! And I declare if she is not gone away without
finishing her wine! Did not I tell you what he said of you the other day?”

She then repeated some warm personal praise which she had drawn from
Mr. Were the same fair prospect to arise at present, as had
flattered them a year ago, everything, she was persuaded, would be
hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. I hope she is right.—In one respect, my good fortune is
undoubted, that of being able to subscribe myself,

Your obliged and affectionate Son,

F. “Pray take care, Mrs. My regard for her, for
yourself, for your mother—will you allow me to prove it, by relating
some circumstances which nothing but a _very_ sincere regard—nothing
but an earnest desire of being useful—I think I am justified—though
where so many hours have been spent in convincing myself that I am
right, is there not some reason to fear I may be wrong?” He stopped. He came down by yesterday’s coach, and was with me this
morning immediately after breakfast, to report his proceedings, first
on my affairs, and then on his own. “This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!” said Mrs. If my vanity had taken a
musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would
really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of
hearing the very best performers.” On Miss Lucas’s persevering, however,
she added, “Very well; if it must be so, it must.” And gravely glancing
at Mr. Jennings, was a
temptation we could not resist. What is to become of us? Woodhouse’s ear; and when their going
farther was resolved on, confessed his wish to be made acquainted with
the whole village, and found matter of commendation and interest much
oftener than Emma could have supposed. I do assure you that the news does not affect
me either with pleasure or pain. He is very far from being
independent. “We were too magnificent,” said he. Is Allenham the only house in the
neighbourhood to which you will be welcome? It was a very awkward moment; and the countenance of each showed that
it was so. He received
the kindest welcome from her; and shyness, coldness, reserve could not
stand against such a reception. “Well, but Miss Dashwood,” speaking triumphantly, “people may say what
they chuse about Mr. “She
will be all delight and gratitude, but she will tell you nothing. Then, the two third he danced with Miss
King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane
again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_----”

“If he had had any compassion for _me_,” cried her husband impatiently,
“he would not have danced half so much! Pemberley was now Georgiana’s home; and the attachment of the sisters
was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. the story which followed, of his
designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed
between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at
last she was referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel
Fitzwilliam himself--from whom she had previously received the
information of his near concern in all his cousin’s affairs and whose
character she had no reason to question. I assure you I
am not at all pleased. Composure with a witness! Is not there a little mistake?” said Jane. Weston a great deal of
pleasure. At such an assembly as this, it
would be insupportable. Elton,
in all her apparatus of happiness, her large bonnet and her basket, was
very ready to lead the way in gathering, accepting, or
talking—strawberries, and only strawberries, could now be thought or
spoken of.—“The best fruit in England—every body’s favourite—always
wholesome.—These the finest beds and finest sorts.—Delightful to gather
for one’s self—the only way of really enjoying them.—Morning decidedly
the best time—never tired—every sort good—hautboy infinitely
superior—no comparison—the others hardly eatable—hautboys very
scarce—Chili preferred—white wood finest flavour of all—price of
strawberries in London—abundance about Bristol—Maple
Grove—cultivation—beds when to be renewed—gardeners thinking exactly
different—no general rule—gardeners never to be put out of their
way—delicious fruit—only too rich to be eaten much of—inferior to
cherries—currants more refreshing—only objection to gathering
strawberries the stooping—glaring sun—tired to death—could bear it no
longer—must go and sit in the shade.”

Such, for half an hour, was the conversation—interrupted only once by
Mrs. Every body is so
surprized; and every body says the same obliging things. I ought to travel. Did you think he
came directly from town?”

“No,” replied Elinor, most feelingly sensible of every fresh
circumstance in favour of Lucy’s veracity; “I remember he told us, that
he had been staying a fortnight with some friends near Plymouth.” She
remembered too, her own surprise at the time, at his mentioning nothing
farther of those friends, at his total silence with respect even to
their names. With him it was most unnatural. You and Mr. At night she opened her heart to Jane. That she should receive an offer of marriage from
Mr. With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held
there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the
son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known
fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behind
him, which Mr. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say
something indistinctly of his

[Illustration:

     “I have not an instant to lose”
]

concern, and observe her in compassionate silence. Edward is only to hold the living till the person
to whom the Colonel has really sold the presentation, is old enough to
take it. They will read together. If he could anyhow
discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he
determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible
to find out the stand and number of the coach. Everything, however, went on smoothly,
and was finally settled according to Charlotte’s first sketch. Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous
falsehood. Harriet is disgraced by any comparison. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing
further to wish. “What do you think? “I cannot imagine,” said Mrs. Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her
spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt
had reserved for them. Mrs. One might guess twenty things without
guessing exactly the right; but I am sure there must be a particular
cause for her chusing to come to Highbury instead of going with the
Campbells to Ireland. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have
no great inclination for talking. But Charlotte, she would not be satisfied, so Mr. “Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,” said she,
“did he come at all?”

She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure. It was the desire of
appearing superior to other people. Miss Fairfax, I dare
say, would not have me if I were to ask her—and I am very sure I shall
never ask her.”

Emma returned her friend’s pressure with interest; and was pleased
enough to exclaim,

“You are not vain, Mr. And after all,
Marianne, after all that is bewitching in the idea of a single and
constant attachment, and all that can be said of one’s happiness
depending entirely on any particular person, it is not meant—it is not
fit—it is not possible that it should be so. As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass
between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or
both, had they appeared to be wrong, she could no more explain such
behaviour than her sister. I like old friends; and Miss Jane
Fairfax is a very pretty sort of young lady, a very pretty and a very
well-behaved young lady indeed. She had seen only Mrs. Elton; but he was
actually hurried off by Miss Bates, she jumped away from him at last
abruptly to the Coles, to usher in a letter from her niece. Dashwood,
“since leisure has not promoted your own happiness, that your sons will
be brought up to as many pursuits, employments, professions, and trades
as Columella’s.”

“They will be brought up,” said he, in a serious accent, “to be as
unlike myself as is possible. The sole grievance and alloy thus removed in the prospect of
Harriet’s welfare, she was really in danger of becoming too happy for
security.—What had she to wish for? Sure
somebody else might be found that would do as well; somebody that is in
orders already.”

“My dear ma’am,” said Elinor, “what can you be thinking of? Mr. Cole, we shall hardly know how to make enough
of her now.”

“Are you expecting Miss Fairfax here soon?”

“Oh yes; next week.”

“Indeed!—that must be a very great pleasure.”

“Thank you. Wickham. Cole? Darcy so bad as this--though I have never liked
him, I had not thought so very ill of him--I had supposed him to be
despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of
descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as
this!”

After a few minutes’ reflection, however, she continued, “I _do_
remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of
his resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper. Weston,
very soon after their moving into the drawing-room: wishing her joy—yet
observing, that she knew the first meeting must be rather alarming.—
Mrs. Weston looked, and looked in vain. He had before
believed her to return his affection with sincere, if not with equal,
regard. Bennet was glad
to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and when tea was over,
glad to invite him

[Illustration:

“Protested
that he never read novels”      H.T Feb 94
]

to read aloud to the ladies. Elton warmly
added,

“Oh no! To do what would be most generally
pleasing must be our object—if one could but tell what that would be.”

“Yes, very true,” cried Frank, “very true. Very little was said by either; Kitty was
too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a
desperate resolution; and, perhaps, he might be doing the same. We shall miss her; but _she_ will be
happy.”

“Oh! I am delighted to
find myself in such a circle. I have not an idea—I
cannot guess it in the least. Willoughby, where was your heart when you wrote those words? When the Campbells
are returned, we shall meet them in London, and continue there, I
trust, till we may carry her northward.—But now, I am at such a
distance from her—is not it hard, Miss Woodhouse?—Till this morning, we
have not once met since the day of reconciliation. “It must be
something extraordinary that could make Colonel Brandon leave my
breakfast table so suddenly.”

In about five minutes he returned. One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this
removal,—the ball at the Crown. “Come Colonel,” said Mrs. According to Miss
Bates—it all came from her—Mrs. Dashwood on receiving and
answering Elinor’s letter would be only to give a repetition of what
her daughters had already felt and said; of a disappointment hardly
less painful than Marianne’s, and an indignation even greater than
Elinor’s. Elinor’s happiness was not so great. I am ashamed of you! He stays till to-morrow, and Miss Fairfax has been persuaded to spend
the day with us.—They are coming in, I hope.”

In half a minute they were in the room. Elton, so obliged to you for the
carriage!—excellent time. My aunt Philips wants you so to
get husbands you can’t think. No one but Jane, she thought,
could flatter herself with such an expectation. Their gentleness, their genuine
attention to other people, and their manly unstudied simplicity is much
more accordant with her real disposition, than the liveliness, often
artificial, and often ill-timed of the other. They will have ten thousand pounds divided amongst
them. “But there may be pretty good guessing. And now here’s Mr. Nothing, but to grow more worthy of
him, whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to her
own. Bennet was not so well pleased with it. And I do not think Mr. [Illustration:

     “Jane happened to look round”
]




CHAPTER LIV. What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the
proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago would now
have been gladly and gratefully received! This was
very amiable; but Charlotte’s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth
had any conception of:--its object was nothing less than to secure her
from any return of Mr. The two girls had been whispering to
each other during the whole visit; and the result of it was, that the
youngest should tax Mr. Jennings with blunt sincerity, no longer able to be
silent, “he has acted like an honest man! Oh! In
short, I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any person whom
you have a regard for, Mrs. The power of observation would be soon given—frightfully soon it
appeared when her thoughts were in one course. The nature and the simplicity of
gentlemen and ladies, with their servants and furniture, I think is
best observed by meals within doors. There is health, not merely in her bloom, but in her air, her head, her
glance. “You have probably entirely forgotten a conversation—(it is not to be
supposed that it could make any impression on you)—a conversation
between us one evening at Barton Park—it was the evening of a dance—in
which I alluded to a lady I had once known, as resembling, in some
measure, your sister Marianne.”

“Indeed,” answered Elinor, “I have _not_ forgotten it.” He looked
pleased by this remembrance, and added,

“If I am not deceived by the uncertainty, the partiality of tender
recollection, there is a very strong resemblance between them, as well
in mind as person. Abundance of civilities passed on all
sides. It was then about
twelve o’clock, and she returned to her sister’s apartment to wait for
the arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by her the rest of the
night. Darcy is
engaged to _my daughter_. I have known myself to be
divided from Edward for ever, without hearing one circumstance that
could make me less desire the connection. The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately in view. Knightley,
to come out at this late hour to call upon us. We seem so beset with difficulties
on every side, that though it would make us miserable for a time, we
should be happier perhaps in the end. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. Hers has been a very short one! for I know gentlemen do not like morning visits,
and Mr. So near
a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to
_his_ easy temper, or _her_ affectionate heart. This must not be.” And touching Miss Bates, who at that
moment passed near—“Miss Bates, are you mad, to let your niece sing
herself hoarse in this manner? I wonder what will become of her!”

“So do I,” said Mrs. Without shutting herself up from her family, or leaving the house in
determined solitude to avoid them, or lying awake the whole night to
indulge meditation, Elinor found every day afforded her leisure enough
to think of Edward, and of Edward’s behaviour, in every possible
variety which the different state of her spirits at different times
could produce,—with tenderness, pity, approbation, censure, and doubt. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be
quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the
village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold
them into harmony and plenty. Mrs. “While her dear father lived, any change of condition must be
impossible for her. Her answer was warmly in his favour. The children are all hanging about
her already, as if she was an old acquaintance. Woodhouse could never allow for Mr. By your account, he
does seem to have had some scruples. She acknowledged, therefore, that though she had
never been informed by themselves of the terms on which they stood with
each other, of their mutual affection she had no doubt, and of their
correspondence she was not astonished to hear. how so? “What does all
that signify? Perhaps, by-and-by, I
may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones; but
_now_ we may be silent.”

“Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?”

“Sometimes. Tell me, I charge you tell me this moment what
it is.”

“No, indeed you are mistaken.”—

“Mr. No sooner was her answer dispatched, than Mrs. Brandon’s, was but too
natural. Instead of talking of Edward, they came
gradually to talk only of Robert,—a subject on which he had always more
to say than on any other, and in which she soon betrayed an interest
even equal to his own; and in short, it became speedily evident to
both, that he had entirely supplanted his brother. “Edward talks of going to Oxford soon,” said she; “but now he is
lodging at No.—, Pall Mall. There are people, who the more you do for them, the
less they will do for themselves. At last he was persuaded to move on from the front of the Crown; and
being now almost facing the house where the Bateses lodged, Emma
recollected his intended visit the day before, and asked him if he had
paid it. He will find an _addition_ to the society
of Highbury when he comes again; that is, if I may presume to call
myself an addition. He loved to have the cloth laid, because it had been the fashion of his
youth, but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made him
rather sorry to see any thing put on it; and while his hospitality
would have welcomed his visitors to every thing, his care for their
health made him grieve that they would eat. and by all accounts, it won’t come
before it’s wanted; for they say he is all to pieces. The attachment, from which against honour, against feeling, against
every better interest he had outwardly torn himself, now, when no
longer allowable, governed every thought; and the connection, for the
sake of which he had, with little scruple, left her sister to misery,
was likely to prove a source of unhappiness to himself of a far more
incurable nature. Weston would never marry
again. His gallantry was always on the alert. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her
Derbyshire friend, that had attended her from that part of the world. And pray what sort of a guardian do you make? But it is done; we are reconciled, dearer, much
dearer, than ever, and no moment’s uneasiness can ever occur between us
again. This was the fact. Elinor, dreading her being tired, led her towards home; and till they
reached the door of the cottage, easily conjecturing what her curiosity
must be though no question was suffered to speak it, talked of nothing
but Willoughby, and their conversation together; and was carefully
minute in every particular of speech and look, where minuteness could
be safely indulged. But (lowering her voice)—nobody
speaks except ourselves, and it is rather too much to be talking
nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people.”

“I say nothing of which I am ashamed,” replied he, with lively
impudence. He was released without any reproach
to himself, from an entanglement which had long formed his misery, from
a woman whom he had long ceased to love;—and elevated at once to that
security with another, which he must have thought of almost with
despair, as soon as he had learnt to consider it with desire. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the
neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they were
in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious
formality, to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife’s
offers of refreshment. The farewell between herself and Mr. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying
similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin
a list, according to his information? How few people know what comfort is! They might chuse
to surprize her.”

Mrs. In the promotion of this object she was zealously active, as far
as her ability reached; and missed no opportunity of projecting
weddings among all the young people of her acquaintance. I was in the middle before I
knew that I _had_ begun.”

“My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my behaviour
to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke
to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Gardiner had formed, of
their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth could not help saying, “It is
very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so.”

“I say no more than the truth, and what everybody will say that knows
him,” replied the other. It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire,
nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither
lay--Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc., are
sufficiently known. I like her the better for it. Dashwood by her own previous alarm; for so great was her
uneasiness about Marianne, that she had already determined to set out
for Cleveland on that very day, without waiting for any further
intelligence, and had so far settled her journey before his arrival,
that the Careys were then expected every moment to fetch Margaret away,
as her mother was unwilling to take her where there might be infection. You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of
offending your patroness.”

“My dear sir,” replied Mr. I am sure she does. Campbell are to be in town again by midsummer,” said
Jane. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take
leave, but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least
an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her
till she could be found. You dare not,
you cannot deny that you have been the principal, if not the only means
of dividing them from each other, of exposing one to the censure of the
world for caprice and instability, the other to its derision for
disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest
kind.”

She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening
with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? The note was immediately despatched, and
its contents as quickly complied with. I am afraid his circumstances may
be bad. That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness,
and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice! Knightley, because she had Emma.”

“True, sir; and Emma, because she had Miss Fairfax.”

Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at least for the
present, said, and with a sincerity which no one could question—

“She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one’s eyes
from. Nothing could
replace him, therefore, in her former esteem, nor injure the interests
of Colonel Brandon. Knightley. Willoughby, for you to relate, or for me
to listen any longer. Her ideas
only varied as to the how much. But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect
of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her
spirits; and, having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she
had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary
transition to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her
particular notice. And how he had been so worried by what passed, that
as soon as he had went away from his mother’s house, he had got upon
his horse, and rid into the country, some where or other; and how he
had stayed about at an inn all Thursday and Friday, on purpose to get
the better of it. Elton, and her attention disengaged, he necessarily began on the
subject with her. The fever was over, and Emma
could harbour little fear of the pulse being quickened again by
injurious courtesy. With insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of
every body’s feelings; with unpardonable arrogance proposed to arrange
every body’s destiny. She saw nothing of the Willoughbys,
nothing of Edward, and for some time nothing of anybody who could by
any chance whether grave or gay, be interesting to her. My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,
    Lords of the earth! And there are several of the young men, too, that she
likes very much. then, don’t speak it, don’t speak it,” she eagerly cried. Mrs. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and
asked her for the two next. “Here is some mistake I am sure—some dreadful mistake. Forster,
the delight of Mrs. Bennet had time to
tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in
momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed
their all walking out. Could he have thought himself encouraged, his looks and language at
parting would have been different.—Still, however, I must be on my
guard. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife.”

“Yes, indeed; his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of
the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made
him happy if they had. the best nature in the world—a wedding.”

After waiting a moment, as if to be sure she intended to say no more,
he replied,

“If you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill, I have heard that
already.”

“How is it possible?” cried Emma, turning her glowing cheeks towards
him; for, while she spoke, it occurred to her that he might have called
at Mrs. I should be sorry, you know,
to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire.”

“Oh, if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in
Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not
much better. Though it is not to be
supposed that Mrs. “Agreed, agreed. Mr. I would go and see her if I could have the
carriage.”

Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, determined to go to her, though the
carriage was not to be had: and as she was no horsewoman, walking was
her only alternative. In such a frame of
mind as she was now in, Elinor had no difficulty in obtaining from her
whatever promise she required; and at her request, Marianne engaged
never to speak of the affair to any one with the least appearance of
bitterness; to meet Lucy without betraying the smallest increase of
dislike to her; and even to see Edward himself, if chance should bring
them together, without any diminution of her usual cordiality. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and
it was but the other day that I recommended another young person, who
was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite
delighted with her. How will a conundrum reckon?”

“Low, I am afraid, sir, very low,” answered his son;—“but we shall be
indulgent—especially to any one who leads the way.”

“No, no,” said Emma, “it will not reckon low. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Weston, his son, Emma, and Harriet, only remained; and the young man’s
spirits now rose to a pitch almost unpleasant. He was full of joy and
attention. To him who has, it might not be so easy to burst forth at once into
perfect independence, and set all their claims on his gratitude and
regard at nought. She brought no name, no blood, no alliance. Weston, who seemed to have walked there on
purpose to be tired, and sit all the time with him, remained, when all
the others were invited or persuaded out, his patient listener and
sympathiser. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that
can be spared from me. Mrs. Knightley, at this
little remains of office.”

“Not at all,” cried he; “I am much obliged to you for it. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on their way
to town; and without any intention of coming back again. She should then have
heard more: Mrs. “Mr. Weston if she did not, papa.—You quite
forget poor Mr. As Harriet now lived, the Martins could not get
at her, without seeking her, where hitherto they had wanted either the
courage or the condescension to seek her; for since her refusal of the
brother, the sisters never had been at Mrs. I am sure I was very much surprized when I
first heard she was going to be married.”

“We must ask Mr. He told her the news. Did you ever hear of that?—A water party;
and by some accident she was falling overboard. His ostensible
reason, however, was to ask whether Mr. And what inclines one less to bear, she has no fair
pretence of family or blood. He had entertained hopes of being
admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard
much; but he saw only the father. Mr. It was put an end to by Mrs. Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in my
life as I have this evening; and there are several of them, you see,
uncommonly pretty.”

“_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room,” said Mr. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat
you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, and
saying your opinion of him is sunk. Weston,
most warmly. Sir John was
delighted; for to a man, whose prevailing anxiety was the dread of
being alone, the acquisition of two, to the number of inhabitants in
London, was something. “Here have I,” said she, “actually talked poor Harriet into being very
much attached to this man. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XLIV. As long as she stays
there, it is all very well. I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for
Purvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.”

Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the
servants remained. What blindness, what madness, had led her on! you amuse me excessively. Married women, you know, may be safely authorised. I shall see you at the Abbey to-morrow
morning I hope, and then we will look them over, and you shall give me
your opinion.”

Mr. Jennings had supposed
her to do, made very light of, at least as far as regarded its size. They encouraged each
other now in the violence of their affliction. There
are, undoubtedly, many who could not say the same; but, thanks to Lady
Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding
little matters.”

Mr. You left
nothing undone. “Such,” said Colonel Brandon, after a pause, “has been the unhappy
resemblance between the fate of mother and daughter! But all this may be explained by
such a situation of his affairs as you have supposed. Elton’s wanting to pay his
addresses to her had sunk him in her opinion. Very odd! You blamed me for coming?”

“No, indeed, I felt nothing but surprise.”

“Your surprise could not be greater than _mine_ in being noticed by you. I went for only one night, and could not
get away till that very day se’nnight.”

Mr. From something that he told me
in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted
to him. In one thing, however, she was uniform,
when it came to the point, in avoiding, where it was possible, the
presence of Mrs. She gave him a brief reply. There was novelty in the scheme; and as, with such a mother and such
uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change
was not unwelcome for its own sake. Something occurred while they were at Hartfield, to make
Emma want their advice; and, which was still more lucky, she wanted
exactly the advice they gave. Her resolution of refusal only grew
more interesting by the addition of a scheme for his subsequent
consolation and happiness. allow me to interpret this interesting
silence. Darcy!”

“It ought to be good,” he replied: “it has been the work of many
generations.”

“And then you have added so much to it yourself--you are always buying
books.”

“I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as
these.”

“Neglect! Nobody can tell what I suffer! Collins and
     myself sincerely sympathize with you, and all your respectable
     family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest
     kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. Two
inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that
Elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief; and the other, that
she herself had been barbarously used by them all; and on these two
points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. His pride
never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just,
sincere, rational, honourable, and, perhaps, agreeable,--allowing
something for fortune and figure.”

The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round
the other table, and Mr. The delightful assurance of her total indifference towards Frank
Churchill, of her having a heart completely disengaged from him, had
given birth to the hope, that, in time, he might gain her affection
himself;—but it had been no present hope—he had only, in the momentary
conquest of eagerness over judgment, aspired to be told that she did
not forbid his attempt to attach her.—The superior hopes which
gradually opened were so much the more enchanting.—The affection, which
he had been asking to be allowed to create, if he could, was already
his!—Within half an hour, he had passed from a thoroughly distressed
state of mind, to something so like perfect happiness, that it could
bear no other name. “So, Lizzy,” said he, one
day, “your sister is crossed in love, I find. She was
sorry that Mr. I see
it in her cheek, her smile, her vain attempt to frown. I am almost afraid that every moment will
bring him.”

“Not five minutes to spare even for your friends Miss Fairfax and Miss
Bates? Change of scene might be of
service--and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as
anything.”

Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded
of her sister’s ready acquiescence. As Elinor and Marianne were walking together the next morning the
latter communicated a piece of news to her sister, which in spite of
all that she knew before of Marianne’s imprudence and want of thought,
surprised her by its extravagant testimony of both. [Illustration:

“Mr. My mother does not hear; she is a little deaf you know. Well, that was very decided, indeed--that does seem as
if--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.”

“_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza,” said
Charlotte. Quick
and decided in her ways, Emma lost no time in inviting, encouraging,
and telling her to come very often; and as their acquaintance
increased, so did their satisfaction in each other. They met several times, for there
     was much to be discussed. My idea of the simple and the natural will be to have the
table spread in the dining-room. But it was _not_ Colonel Brandon;
neither his air, nor his height. The Dashwoods were two days on the road, and Marianne bore her journey
on both, without essential fatigue. He did consent. Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
to Darcy,--

“Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and
could have the advantage of a London master. Hughes. Frank Churchill.—At the same time it is fair to observe, that I am one
of those who always judge for themselves, and are by no means
implicitly guided by others. With _your_
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
others! He was not in
spirits, however; he praised their house, admired its prospect, was
attentive, and kind; but still he was not in spirits. Yours,” etc. Papa, if you speak in that melancholy
way, you will be giving Isabella a false idea of us all. There must be three months, at least, of
deep mourning; but when they are over, I imagine there will be nothing
more to wait for.”

“Thank you, thank you.—This is just what I wanted to be assured of.—Oh! The two first dances, however, brought a return of
distress: they were dances of mortification. So very odd we should happen to meet! Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their
visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he
turned to his daughter and said,--

“Jane, I congratulate you. They walked on. Elton about relief from the parish; he
is very well to do himself, you know, being head man at the Crown,
ostler, and every thing of that sort, but still he cannot keep his
father without some help; and so, when Mr. Woodhouse, always the first object on such
occasions, was carefully attended to his own by Mr. The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was
said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on
Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. He had never before supposed
that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would be
done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present
arrangement. Mrs. Knightley, “of this great intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith, but
I think it a bad thing.”

“A bad thing! The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at the houses of Mrs. Of John I know very little, though we have lived together
for years; but of Willoughby my judgment has long been formed.”

Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more. It then occurred to her
to employ him in reading. “Some people imagine that there can be no accommodations, no space in a
cottage; but this is all a mistake. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the
circumstance when you were in Kent?”

“I _have_ heard from authority, which I thought _as good_, that it was
left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.”

“You have! He was
directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that
he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down
the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would
interfere. Many
counties, I believe, are called the garden of England, as well as
Surry.”

“No, I fancy not,” replied Mrs. I should not like a man
who is so soon discomposed by a hot morning. Jane had been a week in town, without either seeing or
hearing from Caroline. But I kept my eye on it; and, as soon as I
dared, caught it up, and never parted with it again from that moment.”

“I do remember it,” cried Emma; “I perfectly remember it.—Talking about
spruce-beer.—Oh! The principal
purport of his letter was to inform them, that Mr. Bennet and
the children. When it came to such a pitch as this, she was not able to refrain from
a start, or a heavy sigh, or even from walking about the room for a few
seconds—and the only source whence any thing like consolation or
composure could be drawn, was in the resolution of her own better
conduct, and the hope that, however inferior in spirit and gaiety might
be the following and every future winter of her life to the past, it
would yet find her more rational, more acquainted with herself, and
leave her less to regret when it were gone. But though so much of the
matter was known to them already, that Mrs. She thought he was often looking
at her, and trying for a fuller view of her face than it suited her to
give. Lady Middleton was
ashamed of doing nothing before them, and the flattery which Lucy was
proud to think of and administer at other times, she feared they would
despise her for offering. “It is a long time, Mr. Time, a very little time, I tell him, will
do everything; Marianne’s heart is not to be wasted for ever on such a
man as Willoughby. Her Ladyship’s carriage is regularly ordered for us. “I never saw any gentleman’s handwriting”—Emma began, looking also at
Mrs. You will soon have exhausted each favourite
topic. Now, pray do,—and come
while the Westons are with us. Mrs. “Your affectionate friend,

“LYDIA BENNET.”


“Oh, thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!” cried Elizabeth when she had
finished it. The
event acquitted her of all the fancifulness, and all the selfishness of
imaginary complaints. How they could be thrown together,
and by what attraction Robert could be drawn on to marry a girl, of
whose beauty she had herself heard him speak without any admiration,—a
girl too already engaged to his brother, and on whose account that
brother had been thrown off by his family—it was beyond her
comprehension to make out. He
inquired in a friendly, though general, way, after her family, and
looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done. Palmer too I am sure,
though we could not get him to own it last night.”

Mrs. Dashwood as soon as she could be assured
that her visit would be no inconvenience; and as this message was
answered by an invitation equally polite, her ladyship was introduced
to them the next day. I rather wished than believed him to be
sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to his
proposal. For my temptation to _think_ it
a right, I refer every caviller to a brick house, sashed windows below,
and casements above, in Highbury. where shall we sit? This preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of
twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all the good
luck of it. Emma guessed him to be the drudge of
some attorney, and too stupid to rise. Even you, used as you are to great sums, would
hardly believe that so much could be given to a young person like
Jane.”

“Ah! Bingley--is not he? Mrs. That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other
inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. She read the
concluding lines, and was all flutter and happiness. Dashwood was convinced that
her conjecture had been just. no—I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it. Pardon me—but you will be
limited as to number—only three at once.”

Miss Bates, deceived by the mock ceremony of her manner, did not
immediately catch her meaning; but, when it burst on her, it could not
anger, though a slight blush shewed that it could pain her. [Illustration:

     ‘Lady Catherine, said she, you have given me a treasure.’

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER XXIX. While he staid, the
Martins were forgotten; and on the very morning of his setting off for
Bath again, Emma, to dissipate some of the distress it occasioned,
judged it best for her to return Elizabeth Martin’s visit. Woodhouse felt no unwillingness, and only made the
usual stipulation of not sitting at the bottom of the table himself,
with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who should do it for him. Half a
minute brought it all out. Elton, the caution he had given, the
conviction he had professed that Mr. You and Miss Smith, and
Miss Fairfax, will be three, and the two Miss Coxes five; and for five
couple there will be plenty of room.”

But soon it came to be on one side,

“But will there be good room for five couple?—I really do not think
there will.”

On another,

“And after all, five couple are not enough to make it worth while to
stand up. Knightley was so
obliging as to put up with it, and seek no farther explanation. But as he required the promise, I
could not do less than give it; at least I thought so at the time. What has he been judging by?—I am not conscious of any
difference in my spirits or conversation that could prepare him at this
time for my marrying any more than at another.—But it was so, I
suppose. Quite a surprize to me! She was most forcibly struck. I am particularly unlucky
in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character, in a
part of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree
of credit. He did not
think we ever walked this road. Miss Dashwood had a delicate complexion, regular features, and a
remarkably pretty figure. Mr. As soon, however, as the consciousness of all this was
forced by continual repetition on Marianne, she could stay no longer. Very
well upon my word. Taylor told
me of it half an hour ago, and she was told it by a particular friend
of Miss Grey herself, else I am sure I should not have believed it; and
I was almost ready to sink as it was. and I am sure our
thanks are due to you, Mrs. What were nine miles to a
young man?—An hour’s ride. No objection was raised on the father’s side; the young man was treated
liberally; it was all as it should be: and as Emma became acquainted
with Robert Martin, who was now introduced at Hartfield, she fully
acknowledged in him all the appearance of sense and worth which could
bid fairest for her little friend. Churchill does every thing that any other fine
lady ever did. “Now,”—said Emma, when they were fairly beyond the sweep gates,—“now
Mr. They hardly can satisfy a
woman of her good sense and quick feelings: standing in a mother’s
place, but without a mother’s affection to blind her. Collins will be very glad of your
company, I am sure.”

“I am much obliged to your Ladyship for your kind invitation,” replied
Elizabeth; “but it is not in my power to accept it. If I had but her memory! Jennings therefore attending her up stairs
into the sick chamber, to satisfy herself that all continued right,
left her there again to her charge and her thoughts, and retired to her
own room to write letters and sleep. He was accused of having a delightful
voice, and a perfect knowledge of music; which was properly denied; and
that he knew nothing of the matter, and had no voice at all, roundly
asserted. But I
live out of the world, and am often astonished at what I hear. But you
had better change your mind.”

“I assure you it is not in my power.”

He then took leave of the whole party. “She could not compose herself— Mr. In that point, however,
I undervalued my own magnanimity, as the event declared; for I went, I
saw her, and saw her miserable, and left her miserable—and left her
hoping never to see her again.”

“Why did you call, Mr. Bennet’s civilities. I
_should_ say, one of her Ladyship’s carriages, for she has several.”

“Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman, indeed,” added
Charlotte, “and a most attentive neighbour.”

“Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. I am sure she will be an
excellent servant; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor
to have somebody about her that she is used to see. Elton had undoubtedly
the advantage, at this time, in vanity completely gratified; for though
she had intended to begin with Frank Churchill, she could not lose by
the change. Jones’s shopboy in the street, who had
told her that they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield,
because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility was claimed
towards Mr. The grounds were declared to be highly beautiful, and Sir
John, who was particularly warm in their praise, might be allowed to be
a tolerable judge, for he had formed parties to visit them, at least,
twice every summer for the last ten years. Bingley. Mrs. CHAPTER XIII. Perhaps I
did not always love him so well as I do now; but in such cases as these
a good memory is unpardonable. Mr. had she never brought Harriet forward! No, no,
you shall not deceive me: I know it to be impossible.”

“This is a wretched beginning, indeed! She now resolved to keep Harriet no longer in the dark. Ferrars would only
allow him five hundred a-year, she would make as good an appearance
with it as any body else would with eight. The difference which Randalls, Randalls alone makes in
your goings-on, is very great.”

“Yes,” said his brother quickly, “it is Randalls that does it all.”

“Very well—and as Randalls, I suppose, is not likely to have less
influence than heretofore, it strikes me as a possible thing, Emma,
that Henry and John may be sometimes in the way. “Whatever
can give his sister any pleasure, is sure to be done in a moment. Palmer is always going about the country canvassing
against the election; and so many people came to dine with us that I
never saw before, it is quite charming! But then there is not so clever a man any where.”

“And Mrs. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing,
dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and, besides all
this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of
walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word
will be but half deserved.”

“All this she must possess,” added Darcy; “and to all she must yet add
something more substantial in the improvement of her mind by extensive
reading.”

“I am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished women. as we went along Kitty and me drew up all the blinds, and pretended
there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if
Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we
behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest
cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have
treated you too. In respectability of character, there can be no doubt that they
are. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is a
very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. Bragge, had such an infinity of applications; every
body was anxious to be in her family, for she moves in the first
circle. _She_ would notice her; she would improve
her; she would detach her from her bad acquaintance, and introduce her
into good society; she would form her opinions and her manners. But this good old Mr. The country is a vast deal
pleasanter, is not it, Mr. She could
not think that Harriet’s solace or her own sins required more; and she
was therefore industriously getting rid of the subject as they
returned;—but it burst out again when she thought she had succeeded,
and after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer in winter,
and receiving no other answer than a very plaintive—“Mr. But one thing may
be said for me: even in that horrid state of selfish vanity, I did not
know the extent of the injury I meditated, because I did not _then_
know what it was to love. But then,
Mrs. It was a melancholy change; and Emma could not but
sigh over it, and wish for impossible things, till her father awoke,
and made it necessary to be cheerful. “Then who taught you? Mrs. For the convenience of
Charlotte and her child, they were to be more than two days on their
journey, and Mr. If she were to meet Miss Bates in her way!—and upon its
beginning to rain, Emma was obliged to expect that the weather would be
detaining her at Mrs. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in
her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself. Knightley and herself, in procuring him the proper
invitation. Mr. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XXII. “Four o’clock!—depend upon it he will be here by three,” was Mr. Elton. A young farmer, whether on horseback or on foot,
is the very last sort of person to raise my curiosity. And Mr. I hope we
may often meet again.”

Elizabeth smiled. “Then she has forgiven me
before she ought to have done it. He seems every thing the fondest parent could.... we talked and laughed so
loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!”

To this, Mary very gravely replied, “Far be it from me, my dear sister,
to depreciate such pleasures. Knowing all this, as I have now known it many weeks, guess what I
must have felt on seeing your sister as fond of him as ever, and on
being assured that she was to marry him: guess what I must have felt
for all your sakes. Ferrars was the most
unfortunate of women—poor Fanny had suffered agonies of sensibility—and
he considered the existence of each, under such a blow, with grateful
wonder. Darcy, it determined her not to attend her
cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Weston and Harriet,) whose thoughts I might not be
afraid of knowing.”

“It is a sort of thing,” cried Mrs. Willoughby was a young man of good abilities, quick
imagination, lively spirits, and open, affectionate manners. Philips, and
she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her
neighbours in Meryton. It was as follows:

“Bartlett’s Building, March. That is the reason of her writing out of rule, as we call it; for, in
the common course, we should not have heard from her before next
Tuesday or Wednesday.”

“Yes, so I imagined. His father only called him a coxcomb, and
thought it a very good story; but that Mrs. But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the
latter depended on the will of the parents. You will
hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for
resisting every repetition of it. Elizabeth would wonder, and
probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be
shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. “Oh! Darcy danced
only once with Mrs. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone
for those casual errors, under which she would endeavour to class what
Mr. I have known him
too long and too well to be a fair judge. The invitation was accepted, of course, and at a proper hour they joined
the party in Lady Catherine’s drawing-room. Weston had just gone through
by herself. I forget what it was
now, but it was something so droll!”

After an hour or two spent in what her mother called comfortable chat,
or in other words, in every variety of inquiry concerning all their
acquaintance on Mrs. Brother-in-law of Wickham! “I met Mrs. Having now said enough to make his poverty clear, and to do away the
necessity of buying a pair of ear-rings for each of his sisters, in his
next visit at Gray’s, his thoughts took a cheerfuller turn, and he
began to congratulate Elinor on having such a friend as Mrs. Give me further particulars. CHAPTER VIII


The wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill was in Emma’s thoughts all the
evening. and she had difficulty in behaving with temper. but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand. But to be candid without ostentation or design,--to take the
good of everybody’s character and make it still better, and say nothing
of the bad,--belongs to you alone. Perry.”

“It is odd though,” observed his father, “that you should have had such
a regular connected dream about people whom it was not very likely you
should be thinking of at Enscombe. Surely this comparison must have its use
with her. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of
your secrecy. Elinor, however little concerned in it, joined
in their discourse; and Marianne, who had the knack of finding her way
in every house to the library, however it might be avoided by the
family in general, soon procured herself a book. Pray read on.”

“‘After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her Ladyship last
night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she
felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that, on the score of
some family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give
her consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. Elton very agreeable. Elizabeth’s eyes were fixed on her, with most painful sensations; and
she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience
which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving
amongst the thanks of the table the hint of a hope that she might be
prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute
began another. As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of
the family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies
moved for the night; and Mrs. and Mrs. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Where would be the use of his bringing us a charade made by a
friend upon a mermaid or a shark? He
looked around, as if to see that no one were near, and then said,

“Emma, I must once more speak to you as I have been used to do: a
privilege rather endured than allowed, perhaps, but I must still use
it. In about half an hour her mother returned, and though her eyes were
red, her countenance was not uncheerful. Dixon, for which I
do not at all blame them; of course she heard every thing he might be
telling Miss Campbell about his own home in Ireland; and I think she
wrote us word that he had shewn them some drawings of the place, views
that he had taken himself. You
have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed
for him. I have never been
attached to him. It was necessary to laugh when she
would rather have cried. Bennet. As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from
the marriage of her sisters. There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are. She lost all concern for him in
finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the
reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever
cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified,
and her preference secured, at any time, by their renewal. “Nor, if you were, could I ever bear to part with you, my Harriet. Frank
Churchill’s little inclination to exclude himself increased so much,
that his last words to Emma were,

“Well;—if _you_ wish me to stay and join the party, I will.”

She smiled her acceptance; and nothing less than a summons from
Richmond was to take him back before the following evening. I should be as ready to acknowledge his
merits as any other man; but I hear of none, except what are merely
personal; that he is well-grown and good-looking, with smooth,
plausible manners.”

“Well, if he have nothing else to recommend him, he will be a treasure
at Highbury. They now walked on in silence; each of them deep in thought. Weston was disappointed. Happy to find that she was not suspected of any extraordinary interest
in it; that Mrs. Mr. Darcy,
that you hardly ever forgave;--that your resentment, once created, was
unappeasable. Colonel Brandon loves Marianne. Elton’s very promising
attachment was likely to add. He does not
want abilities. Where does discretion end,
and avarice begin? The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other. “Is it very ugly?” continued Mrs. Knightley to invite them—very kind
and sensible—much cleverer than dining out.—He was not fond of dining
out.”

Mr. But
her account of every thing leaves so much to be guessed, she is so very
reserved, so very unwilling to give the least information about any
body, that I really think you may say what you like of your
acquaintance with her.”

“May I, indeed?—Then I will speak the truth, and nothing suits me so
well. Marianne was in a silent
agony, too much oppressed even for tears; but as Mrs. By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. How
grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every
respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had
been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family! Do not pity me till I saw her wan, sick looks.—I reached Highbury at
the time of day when, from my knowledge of their late breakfast hour, I
was certain of a good chance of finding her alone.—I was not
disappointed; and at last I was not disappointed either in the object
of my journey. I was young once, but I never was very handsome—worse
luck for me. I never hear
better sense from any one than Robert Martin. I am sure if I knew of any thing she would like, I
would send all over the town for it. Bates’s, and gone through his
share of this essential attention most handsomely; but she having then
induced Miss Fairfax to join her in an airing, was now returned with
much more to say, and much more to say with satisfaction, than a
quarter of an hour spent in Mrs. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her
in an agitated manner, and thus began:--

“In vain have I struggled. Even _your_
satisfaction I made sure of. Mine, I confess, are
exhausted. Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her
father’s behaviour as a husband. Ma’am,” addressing her, “do you hear what Miss Woodhouse is so obliging
to say about Jane’s handwriting?”

And Emma had the advantage of hearing her own silly compliment repeated
twice over before the good old lady could comprehend it. “Has no letter been left here for me since we went out?” said she to
the footman who then entered with the parcels. Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he
speaks. She says she never shall think well of anybody again; and one
cannot wonder at it, after being so deceived!—meeting with such
ingratitude, where so much kindness had been shown, so much confidence
had been placed! “I am afraid, Miss Marianne,” said Sir John, “you have not been able to
take your usual walk to Allenham today.”

Marianne looked very grave and said nothing. Mr. In one
moment such a change! It has been so many years my province to
give advice, that you cannot be surprized, Mr. But
every thing was then just settled between Miss Grey and me. It is
not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it
might strike them that they could be more economically, though less
expeditiously, married in London, than in Scotland.”

“But why all this secrecy? Jennings to be called, only tortured her more, by hints of what
her mistress had always thought. Bennet, “that you should be so
ready to think your own children silly. At her time of life, any thing of an illness
destroys the bloom for ever! Weston had occasionally introduced, and who now sat happily occupied in
lamenting, with tender melancholy, over the departure of the “poor
little boys,” or in fondly pointing out, as he took up any stray letter
near him, how beautifully Emma had written it. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature, and for the sake of giving
relief to my own feelings care not how much I may be wounding yours. She
will hardly be less hurt, I suppose, by Robert’s marrying Lucy, than
she would have been by your marrying her.”

“She will be more hurt by it, for Robert always was her favourite.—She
will be more hurt by it, and on the same principle will forgive him
much sooner.”

In what state the affair stood at present between them, Edward knew
not, for no communication with any of his family had yet been attempted
by him. This suspicion was given by some words which accidentally dropped from
him one evening at the park, when they were sitting down together by
mutual consent, while the others were dancing. However, she is very agreeable, and Mrs. He does not read?”

“Oh yes!—that is, no—I do not know—but I believe he has read a good
deal—but not what you would think any thing of. it is no difficulty to see who you take after! I do not care if it _is_
the Doctor’s favourite colour. Miniatures, half-lengths, whole-lengths,
pencil, crayon, and water-colours had been all tried in turn. But yet I think there was something wanting. With great surprise therefore, did she find herself
prevented by a settled rain from going out again after dinner. That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was
another very welcome surprise; for his chief wish at present was to have
as little trouble in the business as possible. Every qualification is raised at times, by the circumstances of the
moment, to more than its real value; and she was sometimes worried down
by officious condolence to rate good-breeding as more indispensable to
comfort than good-nature. He did not advance a word
of praise beyond what she knew to be thoroughly deserved by Mrs. This letter is from Mr. The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Mr. She felt as if the spring would not pass without bringing a
crisis, an event, a something to alter her present composed and
tranquil state. They were
all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that
to be mistress of Pemberley might be something! It did, however.—Her father was quite taken up with the surprize of so
sudden a journey, and his fears that Mr. Weston, however, too eager to be very observant, too communicative
to want others to talk, was very well satisfied with what she did say,
and soon moved away to make the rest of his friends happy by a partial
communication of what the whole room must have overheard already. I considered the past: I saw in my own
behaviour, since the beginning of our acquaintance with him last
autumn, nothing but a series of imprudence towards myself, and want of
kindness to others. Dashwood;
“_she_ must be answerable.”

Marianne would not let her proceed;—and Elinor, satisfied that each
felt their own error, wished to avoid any survey of the past that might
weaken her sister’s spirits; she, therefore, pursuing the first
subject, immediately continued,

“_One_ observation may, I think, be fairly drawn from the whole of the
story—that all Willoughby’s difficulties have arisen from the first
offence against virtue, in his behaviour to Eliza Williams. Elton should have aspired—Miss
Woodhouse lets me chatter on, so good-humouredly. Bingley and Jane were standing together a little detached from the
rest, and talked only to each other. No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his behaviour to
Elinor, than she considered their serious attachment as certain, and
looked forward to their marriage as rapidly approaching. “Well, my dear,” said Mrs. There are places in town, offices, where inquiry
would soon produce something—Offices for the sale—not quite of human
flesh—but of human intellect.”

“Oh! Behold him there, the monarch of the seas! “John told us Mr. Goddard’s, but it was then to be settled that she should
return to Hartfield, to make a regular visit of some days. Lady Middleton too, though
she did not press their mother, pressed them. Willoughby first
rousing himself, broke it thus:

“Well, let me make haste and be gone. Perfect happiness, even in memory, is not common; and there were two
points on which she was not quite easy. He could not see her
in a situation of such danger, without trying to preserve her. She had never seen Frank
Churchill so silent and stupid. Elizabeth took leave of
the whole party in the liveliest spirits. “Well, Lizzy,” said Mrs. Ferrars is to be the man. Can I speak plainer? now you are looking very sly. Were not you struck? That she was
really ill was very certain; he had declared himself convinced of it,
at Randalls. Mr. and the Doctor is
a single man, I warrant you.”

“There now,” said Miss Steele, affectedly simpering, “everybody laughs
at me so about the Doctor, and I cannot think why. I know not in what manner, under what form of
falsehood, he has imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be
wondered at, ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning
either. Collins, awkward and
solemn, apologizing instead of attending, and often moving wrong
without being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a
disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. You need not. Miss Hawkins was the
youngest of the two daughters of a Bristol—merchant, of course, he must
be called; but, as the whole of the profits of his mercantile life
appeared so very moderate, it was not unfair to guess the dignity of
his line of trade had been very moderate also. But now, she would rather it had not happened. He has been opening the doors very often this evening, and
keeping them open very inconsiderately. She asked after their mutual friends; they
were all well.—When had he left them?—Only that morning. Bates’s parlour, with all the
encumbrance of awkward feelings, could have afforded. The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this
conversation passed, by the arrival of some of the very persons of whom
they had been speaking; Mr. “What a charming thing it is that Mrs. Vain,
ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Exactly so. Whatever Marianne was desirous of, her
mother would be eager to promote—she could not expect to influence the
latter to cautiousness of conduct in an affair respecting which she had
never been able to inspire her with distrust; and she dared not explain
the motive of her own disinclination for going to London. Knightley on horse-back not far off. My journey to town—travelling with my own horses, and
therefore so tediously—no creature to speak to—my own reflections so
cheerful—when I looked forward every thing so inviting!—when I looked
back at Barton, the picture so soothing!—oh, it was a blessed journey!”

He stopped. Could he expect to be noticed again by the
regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? Do not defer it. for he is forced to make every body like him.”

Elinor could hardly keep her countenance as she assented to the
hardship of such an obligation. This was all very promising; and, but for
such an unfortunate fancy for having his hair cut, there was nothing to
denote him unworthy of the distinguished honour which her imagination
had given him; the honour, if not of being really in love with her, of
being at least very near it, and saved only by her own
indifference—(for still her resolution held of never marrying)—the
honour, in short, of being marked out for her by all their joint
acquaintance. She went to Mrs. But” (with a little return of anxiety) “it cannot be
expected to last long. Donwell was
famous for its strawberry-beds, which seemed a plea for the invitation:
but no plea was necessary; cabbage-beds would have been enough to tempt
the lady, who only wanted to be going somewhere. The attention of
the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by _him_. She had also to anticipate how her visit would
pass, the quiet tenour of their usual employments, the vexatious
interruptions of Mr. Mrs. Pray, what is your age?”

“With three younger sisters grown up,” replied Elizabeth, smiling, “your
Ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.”

Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer;
and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever
dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence. Is she handsome?”

“She is a most charming young lady, indeed. There is
great fear, great caution, great resolution somewhere.—She is _not_ to
be with the _Dixons_. They settled in town, received
very liberal assistance from Mrs. She believed he was looking at her; probably reflecting
on what she had said, and trying to understand the manner. In this walk Emma and Mr. Dashwood it was valued and cherished. Making-up indeed would not do. I am sure the
service Mr. Edward will be in when he hears of it! But there was no
doing any thing, with Mr. You would have doated on her, had you gone.—But not a word
more. Every thing
was to take its natural course, however, neither impelled nor assisted. Am I to believe that you
have never sought to recommend yourself particularly to Miss
Smith?—that you have never thought seriously of her?”

“Never, madam,” cried he, affronted in his turn: “never, I assure you. But I have injured more than
herself; and I have injured one, whose affection for me (may I say it?)
was scarcely less warm than hers; and whose mind—Oh! From you, her mother, and so kind, so
indulgent a mother, the question could not give offence. To have his love
used so scornfully! I am not conscious of having
provoked the disappointment by any imprudence of my own, I have borne
it as much as possible without spreading it farther. Elton returned, a very happy man. But,
Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. Knightley,) and I will try to hold my tongue. They remained but a few minutes together, as Miss Woodhouse must not be
kept waiting; and Harriet then came running to her with a smiling face,
and in a flutter of spirits, which Miss Woodhouse hoped very soon to
compose. He too was much
distressed; and they sat down together in a most promising state of
embarrassment.—Whether he had asked her pardon for his intrusion on
first coming into the room, he could not recollect; but determining to
be on the safe side, he made his apology in form as soon as he could
say any thing, after taking a chair. A promise of secrecy was of course very
dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the
curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct
questions on his return, as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was
at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to
publish his prosperous love. No, my dearest Marianne, you must wait. Her attention was
now claimed by Mr. At present, I
ask only to hear, once to hear your voice.”

While he spoke, Emma’s mind was most busy, and, with all the wonderful
velocity of thought, had been able—and yet without losing a word—to
catch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole; to see that
Harriet’s hopes had been entirely groundless, a mistake, a delusion, as
complete a delusion as any of her own—that Harriet was nothing; that
she was every thing herself; that what she had been saying relative to
Harriet had been all taken as the language of her own feelings; and
that her agitation, her doubts, her reluctance, her discouragement, had
been all received as discouragement from herself.—And not only was
there time for these convictions, with all their glow of attendant
happiness; there was time also to rejoice that Harriet’s secret had not
escaped her, and to resolve that it need not, and should not.—It was
all the service she could now render her poor friend; for as to any of
that heroism of sentiment which might have prompted her to entreat him
to transfer his affection from herself to Harriet, as infinitely the
most worthy of the two—or even the more simple sublimity of resolving
to refuse him at once and for ever, without vouchsafing any motive,
because he could not marry them both, Emma had it not. From all danger of seeing Willoughby again, her mother considered her
to be at least equally safe in town as in the country, since his
acquaintance must now be dropped by all who called themselves her
friends. Knightley; and, to her great amusement, perceived that she was
taking the other side of the question from her real opinion, and making
use of Mrs. Miss Nash had told her all this, and had talked a great deal
more about Mr. They reached town by
three o’clock the third day, glad to be released, after such a journey,
from the confinement of a carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxury
of a good fire. You cannot
really, seriously, doubt it. I warrant
you, Miss Marianne would have been ready to wait till matters came
round. His concern however was very apparent; and after expressing it with
earnestness, he added, in the same low voice,—“But, Marianne, the horse
is still yours, though you cannot use it now. Mrs. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XL. Emma was rather in dismay
when only half a minute afterwards he began to speak of other things,
and in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment. Bingley her sister’s being in town. Emma
was obliged to fancy what she liked—but she could never believe that in
the same situation _she_ should not have discovered the truth. Stokes.—Every body invited, was certainly to come; Frank had already
written to Enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond his fortnight,
which could not possibly be refused. You must answer it of course—and
speedily.”

“Yes. But I can guess how it
was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had
heard somehow that Mrs. She still intended him for her
friend. “You have heard of a certain Frank Churchill, I presume,” he
continued—“and know him to be my son, though he does not bear my name.”

“Oh! “But
I always thought I _should_. She had high
animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the
attentions of the officers, to whom her uncle’s good dinners and her
own easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. Your portion is unhappily so small, that it will in all likelihood undo
the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. She began by
inquiring if they saw much of Mr. I
have seen a great deal of him, have studied his sentiments and heard
his opinion on subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole, I
venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed, enjoyment of books
exceedingly great, his imagination lively, his observation just and
correct, and his taste delicate and pure. Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. The third day succeeding their knowledge of the particulars, was so
fine, so beautiful a Sunday as to draw many to Kensington Gardens,
though it was only the second week in March. But I
would not alarm you too much. Bragge;
the only school, and not more than five-and-twenty children.”

“Ah! With their wealth, their views increased; their want of a larger house,
their inclination for more company. It could not be otherwise. His cousin was as absurd
as he had hoped; and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,
maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,
and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner
in his pleasure. She stood several minutes before the picture, in
earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the
gallery. it
shews what a sad invalid I am! My acquaintance is so very
extensive, that I have little doubt of hearing of something to suit her
shortly.—I shall introduce her, of course, very particularly to my
brother and sister when they come to us. The original was all her own—her own
happy thoughts and gentle diction. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to
Meryton. But I will no longer importune my young cousin.”

Then, turning to Mr. He thought
she had undertaken more than she was equal to, and that she felt it so
herself, though she would not own it. Grandmama was quite well, had a charming evening with Mr. “I admired your resolution very much, sir,” said he, “in venturing out
in such weather, for of course you saw there would be snow very soon. Palmer does not hear me,” said she, laughing; “he never does
sometimes. “I understand you,” said Elinor. But really, and upon my
honour, I will try to do what I think to be wisest; and now I hope you
are satisfied.”

Her aunt assured her that she was; and Elizabeth, having thanked her for
the kindness of her hints, they parted,--a wonderful instance of advice
being given on such a point without being resented. Willoughby
imagine, I suppose, when his looks censured me for incivility in
breaking up the party, that I was called away to the relief of one whom
he had made poor and miserable; but _had_ he known it, what would it
have availed? At that moment she first perceived him, and her whole countenance
glowing with sudden delight, she would have moved towards him
instantly, had not her sister caught hold of her. I shall have no difficulty,
I suppose, in finding the house; though Fairfax, I believe, is not the
proper name—I should rather say Barnes, or Bates. My poor mother does not
know how to bear it. Elton’s absence just at this
time was the very thing to be desired. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that
I _should_ be looked at. I came only for Willoughby’s sake—and now
who cares for me? I shall call hills steep, which ought to be
bold; surfaces strange and uncouth, which ought to be irregular and
rugged; and distant objects out of sight, which ought only to be
indistinct through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere. This does not apply, however, to Miss Bates; she is only too
good natured and too silly to suit me; but, in general, she is very
much to the taste of every body, though single and though poor. Elton, with a most satisfied smile. “Nay,” said Elizabeth, “this is not fair. Mr. Weston and their son, Miss Bates
and her niece, who had accidentally met. Woodhouse should dine out, on the 24th of December) had been spent
by Harriet at Hartfield, and she had gone home so much indisposed with
a cold, that, but for her own earnest wish of being nursed by Mrs. She will
make him a very proper wife.”

Mr. He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser, by the
hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket
allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her
through her mother’s hands, Lydia’s expenses had been very little within
that sum. And ever since
she was twelve, Emma has been mistress of the house and of you all. Mrs. _Now_
you have nothing to try for. and Miss Bates, and Mrs. On the very last day of the regiment’s remaining in Meryton, he dined,
with others of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth
disposed to part from him in good-humour, that, on his making some
inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she
mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s and Mr. That’s one of
the ladies in the Irish car party, not at all like her.—Well, I
declare—”

They walked off, followed in half a minute by Mr. Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. “Well, he is coming, you see; good news, I think. “If you were never particularly struck by her manners before,” said
she, “I think you will to-day. And so, you like this man’s sisters,
too, do you? shall we ever talk on that subject, Elinor?” hesitatingly it was said. So dull, so
wretchedly dull!—But I have much to say to you on that head, which
cannot be said now.”

And with this admirable discretion did she defer the assurance of her
finding their mutual relatives more disagreeable than ever, and of her
being particularly disgusted with his mother, till they were more in
private. “It might have been a very sad accident.”

“Yet I hardly know how,” cried Marianne, “unless it had been under
totally different circumstances. Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent, and answer in a
manner that appropriated nothing. But above all, above respect and esteem,
there was a motive within her of good-will which could not be
overlooked. my poor dear child, the truth is, that in London it is always a
sickly season. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such
high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. Elinor thought she could distinguish a large W in the
direction; and no sooner was it complete than Marianne, ringing the
bell, requested the footman who answered it to get that letter conveyed
for her to the two-penny post. Ah! From Cleveland, which
was within a few miles of Bristol, the distance to Barton was not
beyond one day, though a long day’s journey; and their mother’s servant
might easily come there to attend them down; and as there could be no
occasion of their staying above a week at Cleveland, they might now be
at home in little more than three weeks’ time. Not that James ever
complains; but it is right to spare our horses when we can. Isabella then went to Emma; but Emma could
not so entirely give up the hope of their being all able to get away;
and they were still discussing the point, when Mr. I
thought it had been only a joke, but so serious a question seems to
imply more; and I must beg, therefore, that you will not deceive
yourself any longer. Churchill, having no children of their own, nor any other young
creature of equal kindred to care for, offered to take the whole charge
of the little Frank soon after her decease. Gardiner’s
house, where they were to remain a few days. I send no compliments to your
mother. But your
_family_ owe me nothing. Dashwood’s disappointment was, at first, severe; but his temper was
cheerful and sanguine; and he might reasonably hope to live many years,
and by living economically, lay by a considerable sum from the produce
of an estate already large, and capable of almost immediate
improvement. The old
well-established grievance of duty against will, parent against child,
was the cause of all. He has been gone only four
weeks.”

Nobody had any information to give; and, after a few more wonderings,
Emma said,

“You are silent, Miss Fairfax—but I hope you mean to take an interest
in this news. Pratt’s purposely to see us. Nobody cares for a letter; the thing is, to be always
happy with pleasant companions. “He is the best landlord, and the best master,” said she, “that ever
lived. And what sort of table do they keep? William Larkins mentioned it here. Woodhouse thinks the fruit thoroughly
wholesome. “I should have been quite disappointed if I had not found you here
_still_,” said she repeatedly, with a strong emphasis on the word. I told
him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his
affairs absurd and impertinent. Bennet,” said his lady to him one day, “have you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?”

Mr. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably
good spirits. From Willoughby their
expression was at first held back, by the embarrassment which the
remembrance of his assistance created. Cole.”

“This is an alliance which, whoever—whatever your friends may be, must
be agreeable to them, provided at least they have common sense; and we
are not to be addressing our conduct to fools. It was consoling that he should know she had some
relations for whom there was no need to blush. Edward Ferrars, the
eldest son of Mrs. “That is an
uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would
be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintance. When is a man to be safe from such wit, if age and infirmity will not
protect him?”

“Infirmity!” said Elinor, “do you call Colonel Brandon infirm? Darcy replied, with great intrepidity,--

“Miss Elizabeth Bennet.”

“Miss Elizabeth Bennet!” repeated Miss Bingley. Palmer, who seemed to feel a relief to himself,
in leaving behind him a person so well able to assist or advise Miss
Dashwood in any emergence. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense
of pleasure was lost in shame. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair. Lady
Middleton had the advantage of being able to spoil her children all the
year round, while Sir John’s independent employments were in existence
only half the time. “Aye, my dear, that I do, indeed. I hope you are quite well. Well, I shall bring Jane with me—Jane and her
aunt.—The rest I leave to you. my dear sir, how are you this morning? You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came
here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will I
be dissuaded from it. Harriet’s sweet easy
temper will not mind it.”

He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal, and came
back all the better—grown quite cool—and, with good manners, like
himself—able to draw a chair close to them, take an interest in their
employment; and regret, in a reasonable way, that he should be so late. Had he feigned
a regard for her which he did not feel? Mrs. That Lucy was disposed to be jealous of her appeared very
probable: it was plain that Edward had always spoken highly in her
praise, not merely from Lucy’s assertion, but from her venturing to
trust her on so short a personal acquaintance, with a secret so
confessedly and evidently important. [Illustration]

Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations
which had at length closed her eyes. You are my best cure.”

“We are going to Box Hill to-morrow;—you will join us. “Shall we see you tomorrow to dinner?” said Mrs. or
thereabouts; and he had gained her with such delightful rapidity—the
first hour of introduction had been so very soon followed by
distinguishing notice; the history which he had to give Mrs. They are gone down to Newcastle, a
place quite northward it seems, and there they are to stay, I do not
know how long. She was, moreover, perpetually
hearing about him; for, excepting when at Hartfield, she was always
among those who saw no fault in Mr. I beg your pardon, Mr. Two or three more
of the chosen only were to be admitted to join them, and it was to be
done in a quiet, unpretending, elegant way, infinitely superior to the
bustle and preparation, the regular eating and drinking, and picnic
parade of the Eltons and the Sucklings. “You doubt me,” cried Jane, slightly colouring; “indeed, you have no
reason. Bingley she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period
saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. I would lay fifty guineas the letter was
of his own writing.”

“I have no doubt of it,” replied Marianne. Well, now
let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way
home. Palmer’s, who lived a
few miles on the other side of Bath; whither her husband promised, at
her earnest entreaty, to join her in a day or two; and whither she was
almost equally urgent with her mother to accompany her. Then they will have a child every year! “I am thinking of what you have been telling me,” said she. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are
to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me
to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may
be; and I shall begin directly, by asking you what made you so unwilling
to come to the point at last? Jennings’s acquaintance to inform them of her being in town; and
Marianne was all the time busy in observing the direction of the wind,
watching the variations of the sky and imagining an alteration in the
air. He joined them immediately, and,
with scarcely an invitation, seated himself between them. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men. But I
cannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly
bestowed it most unwillingly. Elton led the way, Mr. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as Lydia,”
said she, “though I am _not_ her particular friend. She felt all the force of that comparison; but not as her sister had
hoped, to urge her to exertion now; she felt it with all the pain of
continual self-reproach, regretted most bitterly that she had never
exerted herself before; but it brought only the torture of penitence,
without the hope of amendment. Mrs. Elton; “Knightley himself!—Was not it
lucky?—for, not being within when he called the other day, I had never
seen him before; and of course, as so particular a friend of Mr. How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence she
could not imagine. Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement
took place? It has hurt his father equally. CHAPTER VII


Emma’s very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little shaken the
following day, by hearing that he was gone off to London, merely to
have his hair cut. He was, beyond comparison, the pleasantest man: he
certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but,
to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. You, who had seen all the fretful selfishness of my
latter days; who had known all the murmurings of my heart! No one made
any objection but Marianne, who with her usual inattention to the forms
of general civility, exclaimed, “Your Ladyship will have the goodness
to excuse _me_—you know I detest cards. This point was just arranged, when a visitor arrived to tear Emma’s
thoughts a little from the one subject which had engrossed them,
sleeping or waking, the last twenty-four hours—Mrs. She could soon tell at what coachmaker’s the new
carriage was building, by what painter Mr. Margaret returned, and the family were again all restored to each
other, again quietly settled at the cottage; and if not pursuing their
usual studies with quite so much vigour as when they first came to
Barton, at least planning a vigorous prosecution of them in future. It was most unlikely,
therefore, that he should ever want his father’s assistance. Jane was as much gratified by this as her
mother could be, though in a quieter way. Had the same behaviour continued, Miss Smith might
have been led into a misconception of your views; not being aware,
probably, any more than myself, of the very great inequality which you
are so sensible of. She knows I would not
offend for the world. Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew;
and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character, in
her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him
language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time
all intercourse was at an end. She inherits
her mother’s talents, and must have been under subjection to her.”

“I should have been sorry, Mr. “Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Mr. dear me! The
terror which the woman and boy had been creating in Harriet was then
their own portion. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving
alarm or inconvenience, from expressing in her note how much she longed
for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. How I should like such a house for myself! To speak, she
was sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness. Goddard’s, or in London, made perhaps
an unreasonable difference in Emma’s sensations; but she could not
think of her in London without objects of curiosity and employment,
which must be averting the past, and carrying her out of herself. But as to your
other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. He had not been long seated
before he complimented Mrs. By this time she is
actually with them! “I am to hear from him soon,” continued Mrs. But the
clothes, the wedding clothes! There was now employment for the whole
party; for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the
beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches, soon collected
them round the table. I only
doubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else. Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of his wife
and daughters than for himself or his son;—but to his son, and his
son’s son, a child of four years old, it was secured, in such a way, as
to leave to himself no power of providing for those who were most dear
to him, and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate, or
by any sale of its valuable woods. He had ruined for a
while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart
in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have
inflicted. But no such recollection befriended her. Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London, and
promised to write again very soon. Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant
a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by
mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and
endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters,
by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she
was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the
happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character
of Mr. She could never see a
fault in any of them. Though nothing could be more polite than Lady Middleton’s
behaviour to Elinor and Marianne, she did not really like them at all. My objections to the marriage were not merely those which I last night
acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside
in my own case; the want of connection could not be so great an evil to
my friend as to me. He seems perfectly
unprepared for that.”

“Yes, yes—but I am amused that he should have seen so far into my
feelings. His manners to _them_, though calm, were perfectly
kind; to Mrs. They want
her (Mr. He sends us a
sack every year; and certainly there never was such a keeping apple
anywhere as one of his trees—I believe there is two of them. Excellent parsonage-house! I can remember some expressions which might justly
make you hate me.”

“The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the
preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my
opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily
changed as that implies.”

“When I wrote that letter,” replied Darcy, “I believed myself perfectly
calm and cool; but I am since convinced that it was written in a
dreadful bitterness of spirit.”

“The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. He had
not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sort
of preference which was often given me.”

“I had not thought Mr. Hitherto I fancy you and I are
the only people to whom his looks and manners have explained
themselves.”

Harriet blushed and smiled, and said something about wondering that
people should like her so much. Weston’s communications furnished Emma with more food for
unpleasant reflection, by increasing her esteem and compassion, and her
sense of past injustice towards Miss Fairfax. Elinor,
without observing the varying complexion of her sister, and the
animated look which spoke no indifference to the plan, immediately gave
a grateful but absolute denial for both, in which she believed herself
to be speaking their united inclinations. Fourteen minutes to
be given to those with whom she had thankfully passed six weeks not six
months ago!—Emma could not but picture it all, and feel how justly they
might resent, how naturally Harriet must suffer. It would be such a delicious scheme,
and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. I only name possibilities. She could neither
wonder nor condemn; but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing
consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. When they get to our age, I dare say they will
not think about officers any more than we do. Early in February, within a fortnight from the receipt of Willoughby’s
letter, Elinor had the painful office of informing her sister that he
was married. But that
gentleman,” looking at Darcy, “seemed to think the country was nothing
at all.”

“Indeed, mamma, you are mistaken,” said Elizabeth, blushing for her
mother. Five daughters
successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs. Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelings of contempt and
resentment, on this impertinent examination of their features, and on
the puppyism of his manner in deciding on all the different horrors of
the different toothpick-cases presented to his inspection, by remaining
unconscious of it all; for she was as well able to collect her thoughts
within herself, and be as ignorant of what was passing around her, in
Mr. As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they
should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had
marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a
retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of
contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those
feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would
formerly have rejoiced in its termination. My dear aunt, how could you think of it? I could not believe it. I am not qualified to form one. I shall never be quite happy till I
     have been all round the park. I doubt it. Weston and Mrs. Harris’s report, and confirming Charlotte’s
fears and caution, urged the necessity of her immediate removal with
her infant; and Mr. A better written letter, Harriet (returning
it,) than I had expected.”

“Well,” said the still waiting Harriet;—“well—and—and what shall I do?”

“What shall you do! She believed every body found his
manners pleasing.” Emma could not forgive her. What right had he to
come among us with affection and faith engaged, and with manners so
_very_ disengaged? I will fetch your greatcoat and open
the garden door for you.”

Mr. No, he had already done that, which no man who _can_
feel for another would do. Darcy was punctual
     in his return, and, as Lydia informed you, attended the wedding. In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have
little to fix the attention of a stranger. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received
many months ago from Mr. She had
talked her into love; but, alas! But
does it follow that had he married you, he would have been happy?—The
inconveniences would have been different. Only think of those sweet verses—‘To Miss ———.’
Dear me, how clever!—Could it really be meant for me?”

“I cannot make a question, or listen to a question about that. The evil is now
irremediable, and it has been entirely your own doing. At this time of the year, and after such a
series of rain, we shall certainly have very little more of it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his
constancy. They were never tolerated at Maple Grove. She hardly knew yet what Mr. Bennet. The old walnut trees are all come
down to make room for it. Can you think your friend behindhand in these sort of
considerations? He knows he is
wrong, and has nothing rational to urge.—Bad.—He ought not to have
formed the engagement.—‘His father’s disposition:’—he is unjust,
however, to his father. how peculiarly
unprepared I was!—for I had reason to believe her very lately more
determined against him, much more, than she was before.”

“You ought to know your friend best,” replied Mr. Has
not his behaviour to Marianne and to all of us, for at least the last
fortnight, declared that he loved and considered her as his future
wife, and that he felt for us the attachment of the nearest relation? Jennings, sagaciously smiling, as soon
as the gentleman had withdrawn, “I do not ask you what the Colonel has
been saying to you; for though, upon my honour, I _tried_ to keep out
of hearing, I could not help catching enough to understand his
business. I like him very much. He came to ask me whether I
thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so early; whether I
thought her too young: in short, whether I approved his choice
altogether; having some apprehension perhaps of her being considered
(especially since _your_ making so much of her) as in a line of society
above him. Dashwood had recovered herself, to see Marianne was her
first desire; and in two minutes she was with her beloved child,
rendered dearer to her than ever by absence, unhappiness, and danger. You must be the best judge of your own happiness. But indeed, while Elinor
remained so well assured within herself of being really beloved by
Edward, it required no other consideration of probabilities to make it
natural that Lucy should be jealous; and that she was so, her very
confidence was a proof. ‘Oh! John Dashwood was obliged to submit not only to the exceedingly great
inconvenience of sending her carriage for the Miss Dashwoods, but, what
was still worse, must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appearing
to treat them with attention: and who could tell that they might not
expect to go out with her a second time? but such old friends as Lucy and me!—I
think she might see _us;_ and I am sure we would not speak a word.”

Elinor, with great civility, declined the proposal. There I was quite right. How cold, how
composed were their last adieus! She is staying here on a visit to her grandmama and aunt, very
worthy people; I have known them all my life. Annesley is with her. What is it?—why do you smile
so?—where did you hear it?—at Randalls?”

He had time only to say,

“No, not at Randalls; I have not been near Randalls,” when the door was
thrown open, and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room. Bennet; “and I am glad to find that you do
not depend on her serving you.”

Mrs. Now, according to my idea of Mrs. “About Jane Fairfax. So much the better. I will invite your guests.”

“No,”—he calmly replied,—“there is but one married woman in the world
whom I can ever allow to invite what guests she pleases to Donwell, and
that one is—”

“—Mrs. _He_ was
     exactly what he had been when I knew him in Hertfordshire; but I
     would not tell you how little I was satisfied with _her_ behaviour
     while she stayed with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane’s letter
     last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a
     piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no
     fresh pain. She might assist his resolution, or reconcile him to it; she might give
just praise to Harriet, or, by representing to him his own
independence, relieve him from that state of indecision, which must be
more intolerable than any alternative to such a mind as his.—They had
reached the house. Lord of the earth and sea, he bends a slave,
    And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone. He has children
of his own, and may have more. A proper establishment of servants, a
carriage, perhaps two, and hunters, cannot be supported on less.”

Elinor smiled again, to hear her sister describing so accurately their
future expenses at Combe Magna. “He intends to send his groom into Somersetshire immediately for it,”
she added, “and when it arrives we will ride every day. She, therefore, said no more for some time. And what sort of young lady is she? A person may be
proud without being vain. It was very wrong of me, you
know, to keep any remembrances, after he was married. She will be down in a moment, I dare say.”

He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes
and affection of a sister. Her
resolution was formed as she read. Jennings could not prevail on him to
stay long. Miss Dashwood, you cannot have an idea of the comfort it
gives me to look back on my own misery. When the card tables were placed, he had an opportunity of obliging her,
in return, by sitting down to whist. That his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable
resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege, without which her
marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all that she could believe
possible. [Illustration:

“After a short survey”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“How could I ever think her like her nephew?” said she, as she looked in
her face. When those dances
were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with
her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. In seasons of cheerfulness,
no temper could be more cheerful than hers, or possess, in a greater
degree, that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happiness
itself. Bingley,” said her mother,
“I beg you will come here and shoot as many as you please on Mr. Those who do not complain are never pitied.”

Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any
attempt to reason with or soothe her would only increase the irritation. On such a subject,” sighing heavily, “can I have little
temptation to be diffuse.”

He stopt a moment for recollection, and then, with another sigh, went
on. Jennings’s curiosity and Elinor’s too,
that she would tell any thing _without_ being asked; for nothing would
otherwise have been learnt. But she had never felt so
strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so
unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising
from so ill-judged a direction of talents--talents which, rightly used,
might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even
if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife. Lakes, mountains,
and rivers, shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor, when
we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarrelling
about its relative situation. “Yours, etc.”

This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned, as she
considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least. Woodhouse’s. Of very important, very
recordable events, it was not more productive than such meetings
usually are. I know what
you mean—but Emma’s hand is the strongest.”

“Isabella and Emma both write beautifully,” said Mr. A sudden seizure of a different nature from any
thing foreboded by her general state, had carried her off after a short
struggle. Lydia’s voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and
she ran into the room. END OF THE FIRST VOLUME




CHAPTER XXIII. Oh yes, Friday or Saturday next. John Knightley
very far from looking well.”

“What is the matter, sir?—Did you speak to me?” cried Mr. Poor Edward! Angry as she was, the thought of the moment made her resolve to
restrain herself when she did speak. [Illustration]

Every object in the next day’s journey was new and interesting to
Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had
seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health,
and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight. How is it to be supposed that Willoughby,
persuaded as he must be of your sister’s love, should leave her, and
leave her perhaps for months, without telling her of his
affection;—that they should part without a mutual exchange of
confidence?”

“I confess,” replied Elinor, “that every circumstance except _one_ is
in favour of their engagement; but that _one_ is the total silence of
both on the subject, and with me it almost outweighs every other.”

“How strange this is! Keep your raptures for Harriet’s face. She saw it all; and entering into
her feelings, promoted her quitting the house immediately, and watched
her safely off with the zeal of a friend. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday, to say
that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I
particularly begged him to do. I like a fine prospect,
but not on picturesque principles. It is the garden of England, you
know. There is not a room in this cottage that will hold ten couple,
and where can the supper be?’ _I_ immediately saw that there could be
no difficulty in it, so I said, ‘My dear Lady Elliott, do not be
uneasy. and Mrs. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably
persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman’s
concurrence. Emma was sadly fearful
that this second disappointment would be more severe than the first. Elton on this happy occasion;
I said that I hoped I _should_ in the course of the summer. Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this,
heard it in silent indignation. I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make this
rivet quite firm. “Are you not diverted?”

“Oh, yes. She will
be married! However, I don’t
think her hardly at all handsomer than you, I assure you; for I think
you both excessively pretty, and so does Mr. I told my sister Philips so the other day. My dear Charles, what do you mean?”

“Yes, all of them, I think. Edward was not entirely without hopes of some favourable change in his
mother towards him; and on _that_ he rested for the residue of their
income. There
probably _was_ something more to conceal than her own preference; Mr. Weston, whose marriages
taking them from Hartfield, had, indeed, made a melancholy change: but
she was not going from Hartfield; she should be always there; she was
introducing no change in their numbers or their comforts but for the
better; and she was very sure that he would be a great deal the happier
for having Mr. Elizabeth had received none since her return, that could come from
Pemberley. Knightley, he is
_not_ a trifling, silly young man. and
Miss Bates, Mr. Darcy appeared. It would hold the
very number for comfort. Knightley, I shall not allow you to be a fair judge in this case. I believe him to be Lady Catherine’s _nephew_. Now, what have you to say?”

“Only this,--that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will
make an offer to me.”

Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied,--

“The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. are we to have the pleasure of a call from Mr. And therefore I think I will beg your excuse and take my
three turns—my winter walk.”

“You cannot do better, sir.”

“I would ask for the pleasure of your company, Mr. From their counsel, or their conversation, she knew she could receive
no assistance, their tenderness and sorrow must add to her distress,
while her self-command would neither receive encouragement from their
example nor from their praise. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, “_You_ cannot
have a right to such very strong local attachment. It has been my own doing,
and I ought to feel it.”

“You must not be too severe upon yourself,” replied Elizabeth. “We spent such a day, Edward, in Harley Street yesterday! As a daughter, she hoped she was not
without a heart. She was at least free from the offence of Mr. “Now, ma’am,” said Jane to her aunt, “shall we join Mrs. It was necessary
to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such
occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs. Elton going to be married!” said Emma, as soon as she could speak. Mrs. Ever since the service he rendered Jane at
Weymouth, when they were out in that party on the water, and she, by
the sudden whirling round of something or other among the sails, would
have been dashed into the sea at once, and actually was all but gone,
if he had not, with the greatest presence of mind, caught hold of her
habit— (I can never think of it without trembling!)—But ever since we
had the history of that day, I have been so fond of Mr. You have not heard all
that you ought to hear. The next day produced little or no alteration in the state of the
patient; she certainly was not better, and, except that there was no
amendment, did not appear worse. Mrs. She plays charmingly.”

“You think so, do you?—I wanted the opinion of some one who could
really judge. I am a talker, you know; I am rather a talker; and
now and then I have let a thing escape me which I should not. His character was decided. Bingley,” said her husband; “it is a person whom I
never saw in the whole course of my life.”

This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being
eagerly questioned by his wife and five daughters at once. Cole, “and I was only
surprized that there could ever have been a doubt. But the morrow
passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of
each other the balm of sisterly consolation.”

Then perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added,
“Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful
lesson:--that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable, that one
false step involves her in endless ruin, that her reputation is no less
brittle than it is beautiful, and that she cannot be too much guarded in
her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.”

Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to
make any reply. Pray, dear Miss Woodhouse, tell me what I ought to
do.”

“I shall not give you any advice, Harriet. The rich brother-in-law near Bristol was the pride of the
alliance, and his place and his carriages were the pride of him. I want
you to call me something else, but I do not know what.”

“I remember once calling you ‘George,’ in one of my amiable fits, about
ten years ago. CHAPTER II


No misfortune occurred, again to prevent the ball. Charlotte’s first letters
were received with a good deal of eagerness: there could not but be
curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would
like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to
be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte
expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. And how you
will explain away any part of your guilt in that dreadful business, I
confess is beyond my comprehension.”

“Remember,” cried Willoughby, “from whom you received the account. To the former
her raillery was probably, as far as it regarded only himself,
perfectly indifferent; but to the latter it was at first
incomprehensible; and when its object was understood, she hardly knew
whether most to laugh at its absurdity, or censure its impertinence,
for she considered it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel’s
advanced years, and on his forlorn condition as an old bachelor. Henry Dashwood had one son: by his present
lady, three daughters. [Illustration:

M^{rs} Bennet and her two youngest girls

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER IX. It does not often happen
that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of
independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in
love with only a few days before.”

“But that expression of ‘violently in love’ is so hackneyed, so
doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. She thought
well of Frank in almost every respect; and, what was more, she loved
him very much, and her defence was, therefore, earnest. The comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel Brandon—or such
a companion for her mother,—how gratefully was it felt!—a companion
whose judgment would guide, whose attendance must relieve, and whose
friendship might soothe her!—as far as the shock of such a summons
_could_ be lessened to her, his presence, his manners, his assistance,
would lessen it. Elton’s—probably some vulgar, dashing widow, who, with the help
of a boarder, just made a shift to live!—The dignity of Miss Woodhouse,
of Hartfield, was sunk indeed! Why does she not come in?”

“Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. Bingley
was sure of being liked wherever he appeared; Darcy was continually
giving offence. Her mother, still confident of their engagement, and relying as
warmly as ever on his constancy, had only been roused by Elinor’s
application, to intreat from Marianne greater openness towards them
both; and this, with such tenderness towards her, such affection for
Willoughby, and such a conviction of their future happiness in each
other, that she wept with agony through the whole of it. To be sure, London was
rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open. Collins and Charlotte
appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate, which
led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of
the whole party. His countenance was thoroughly good-humoured; and his
manners were as friendly as the style of his letter. Not that I am afraid of
_myself_, but I dread other people’s remarks.”

Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. That her sister’s affections _were_ calm, she dared not deny, though
she blushed to acknowledge it; and of the strength of her own, she gave
a very striking proof, by still loving and respecting that sister, in
spite of this mortifying conviction. “I should be puzzled to spend so large a fortune myself,” said Mrs. how acutely did she now
feel it! Yet she bore it with so much composure, she seemed scarcely
to notice it. Our own
library is too well known to me, to be resorted to for any thing beyond
mere amusement. Martin
did not speak yesterday?”

“Certainly,” replied he, surprized, “I do not absolutely know it; but
it may be inferred. But I have no idea that she has yet ever seen a man she
cared for. The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. Miss Bates was out, which
accounted for the previous tranquillity. I
never was equal to this.”

“Here,” resumed Harriet, turning to her box again, “here is something
still more valuable, I mean that _has_ _been_ more valuable, because
this is what did really once belong to him, which the court-plaister
never did.”

Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing
alarm. His estate had been rated by Sir John at about six
or seven hundred a year; but he lived at an expense to which that
income could hardly be equal, and he had himself often complained of
his poverty. “But it is fortunate,” thought she, “that I have something to wish for. Mrs. “Why should they ask us?” said Marianne, as soon as they were gone. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. yes, that I do indeed. But how she contrives it without reflecting on the
character of her own father, who had himself two wives, I know not. She could not consider
her partiality for Edward in so prosperous a state as Marianne had
believed it. ‘I am sure you must be,’ said he, ‘and I will
send you another supply; for I have a great many more than I can ever
use. Dashwood’s attention; for she was, at that time, in such
affliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects. The business of self-command she settled very easily;—with strong
affections it was impossible, with calm ones it could have no merit. Weston’s to receive them. Partridge, the lady I have
always resided with when in Bath, would be most happy to shew you any
attentions, and would be the very person for you to go into public
with.”

It was as much as Emma could bear, without being impolite. You cannot doubt your sister’s wishes. His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Darcy would
never have come so soon to wait upon me.”

Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment
before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly
afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. and Mrs. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment, nor were
the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had in fact
nothing to do elsewhere. I thought I should have broke my heart.”

“I am sure I shall break _mine_,” said Lydia. “My dear Mr. Elton eagerly interposed with,

“Oh! I could
not trace her beyond her first seducer, and there was every reason to
fear that she had removed from him only to sink deeper in a life of
sin. Dixon. We have had great trials, and great
persecutions, but however, at the same time, gratefully acknowledge
many friends, yourself not the least among them, whose great kindness I
shall always thankfully remember, as will Edward too, who I have told
of it. “If he is not here
by the end of the week, I shall go after him.”

“Ay, so do, Sir John,” cried Mrs. I absolutely cannot do without music. “I have heard it asserted,” said John Knightley, “that the same sort of
handwriting often prevails in a family; and where the same master
teaches, it is natural enough. Knightley and themselves. Dashwood’s sisters, she
immediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street; and this
misconstruction produced within a day or two afterwards, cards of
invitation for them as well as for their brother and sister, to a small
musical party at her house. Yes, quite a proposal of marriage; and a very good
letter, at least she thought so. Dixon. But I could not reason so to a man in love, and was willing to
trust to there being no harm in her, to her having that sort of
disposition, which, in good hands, like his, might be easily led aright
and turn out very well. Ferrars may afford to do very well by her son, and though
Lucy has next to nothing herself, she knows better than any body how to
make the most of every thing; I dare say, if Mrs. Good gracious! How
could he answer it to himself to rob his child, and his only child too,
of so large a sum? She could not be complying, she dreaded being
quarrelsome; her heroism reached only to silence. Who cried most?”

“Ah! He thought we walked towards Randalls
most days. It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. Elton’s importance with her! Mrs. In this room they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there
with Mrs. But are you really so attached to this
place as to see no defect in it?”

“I am,” said he. You could not give me a greater reproof for the mistake I fell into. Not so the Miss Steeles. But Mrs. Was she out with him
today?”

But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the colour of Mr. The two ladies were delighted to see
their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and
repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their
separation. You could make it into two parcels,
Mrs. She would not stir a step, nor drop a hint. I did it because I thought it would offend you; but, as
you made no objection, I never did it again.”

“And cannot you call me ‘George’ now?”

“Impossible!—I never can call you any thing but ‘Mr. And with no one to speak to of what I
felt, no Jane to comfort me, and say that I had not been so very weak,
and vain, and nonsensical, as I knew I had! CHAPTER XVIII


“I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introducing my son to you,”
said Mr. As for
Isabella, she has been married long enough to see the convenience of
putting all the Mr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. “Oh! Knightley could know and bear with Mr. Robert Martin, to
join the hands of Mr. She could not imagine what business he could have in town
so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that
he might always be flying about from one place to another, and never
settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. These parlors are both too small for such parties of our
friends as I hope to see often collected here; and I have some thoughts
of throwing the passage into one of them with perhaps a part of the
other, and so leave the remainder of that other for an entrance; this,
with a new drawing room which may be easily added, and a bed-chamber
and garret above, will make it a very snug little cottage. It had no park, but the pleasure-grounds were tolerably
extensive; and like every other place of the same degree of importance,
it had its open shrubbery, and closer wood walk, a road of smooth
gravel winding round a plantation, led to the front, the lawn was
dotted over with timber, the house itself was under the guardianship of
the fir, the mountain-ash, and the acacia, and a thick screen of them
altogether, interspersed with tall Lombardy poplars, shut out the
offices. Nobody could nurse her, as we should do.”

“It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world.”

“And so she is to come to us next Friday or Saturday, and the Campbells
leave town in their way to Holyhead the Monday following—as you will
find from Jane’s letter. “How charming it will be,” said Charlotte, “when he is in
Parliament!—won’t it? Weston had been delighted before, and was delighted again; Emma joined
her in all her praise; and the pianoforte, with every proper
discrimination, was pronounced to be altogether of the highest promise. Her own behaviour had been so very improper! Cole told us of it at dinner.”

“You take up an idea, Mrs. “What is the matter?” said she. Nothing new was heard by them, for a day or two afterwards, of affairs
in Harley Street, or Bartlett’s Buildings. Campbell.”

“Nothing can be actually settled yet, perhaps,” replied Emma,
smiling—“but, excuse me, it must be thought of.”

The smile was returned as Jane answered,

“You are very right; it has been thought of. She had
hardly been able to speak a word, and every look and action had shewn
how deeply she was suffering from consciousness. Long letters from her, quickly succeeding each other, arrived
to tell all that she suffered and thought; to express her anxious
solicitude for Marianne, and entreat she would bear up with fortitude
under this misfortune. John Dashwood had
not much to say for himself that was worth hearing, and his wife had
still less. Jennings, “before you go, do let us know what
you are going about.”

He wished her a good morning, and, attended by Sir John, left the room. You are resolved to think him blameable, because he took leave
of us with less affection than his usual behaviour has shown. That was well done
of me; but there I should have stopped, and left the rest to time and
chance. I felt sure that you was angry
with me; and have been quarrelling with myself ever since, for having
took such a liberty as to trouble you with my affairs. Miss Taylor has been used to have two persons
to please; she will now have but one. He reads the
Agricultural Reports, and some other books that lay in one of the
window seats—but he reads all _them_ to himself. It was an office in short, from which, unwilling to give
Edward the pain of receiving an obligation from _her_, she would have
been very glad to be spared herself; but Colonel Brandon, on motives of
equal delicacy, declining it likewise, still seemed so desirous of its
being given through her means, that she would not on any account make
farther opposition. She practises very constantly.”

“So much the better. The manner in
which Miss Steele had spoken of Edward, increased her curiosity; for it
struck her as being rather ill-natured, and suggested the suspicion of
that lady’s knowing, or fancying herself to know something to his
disadvantage.—But her curiosity was unavailing, for no farther notice
was taken of Mr. with the help of spectacles. But it would not do; he had not come to
the point. I cannot recollect.—It is very odd, but I cannot
recollect.—Mr. Long is as
good a creature as ever lived--and her nieces are very pretty behaved
girls, and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously.”

[Illustration:

     “M^{rs}. Jennings, as soon as she was gone, “how it
grieves me to see her! Woodhouse any commands, should be
happy to attend to them.”

Emma was most agreeably surprized.—Mr. Elton. [Illustration]

Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley’s dislike of her had
originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how very unwelcome
her appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know
with how much civility on that lady’s side the acquaintance would now
be renewed. You are not afraid of being supposed
ashamed. You will find me a
very awkward narrator, Miss Dashwood; I hardly know where to begin. I must not quarrel with a spirit of forbearance which has
been so richly extended towards myself; but, otherwise, I should loudly
protest against the share of it which that woman has known.—‘Jane,’
indeed!—You will observe that I have not yet indulged myself in calling
her by that name, even to you. [Illustration]

Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from
Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been
renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on
the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the
receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that
it had been mis-sent elsewhere. And I think she feels it. But he was now married; and she condemned her heart for the lurking
flattery, which so much heightened the pain of the intelligence. I cannot
catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their
concerns, as I often see done.”

“My fingers,” said Elizabeth, “do not move over this instrument in the
masterly manner which I see so many women’s do. Consider what you are about. “Do not boast of it, however,” said Elinor, “for it is injustice in
both of you. “Impossible! “Norland is a prodigious beautiful place, is not it?” added Miss
Steele. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of
Mr. Knightleys; their subjects totally
distinct, or very rarely mixing—and Emma only occasionally joining in
one or the other. However, the very same evening William Larkins came over with a large
basket of apples, the same sort of apples, a bushel at least, and I was
very much obliged, and went down and spoke to William Larkins and said
every thing, as you may suppose. “But who is he?” said Elinor. She would catch a dreadful cold. Philips, as well as her sister, stood in
too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley’s
good-humour encouraged; yet, whenever she _did_ speak, she must be
vulgar. Now
you see it is all gone.”




CHAPTER XXXV. Elton, but I have not much faith
in Mrs. Oh! For Mrs. He was gone the next
moment:—after another moment’s pause,

“Take it,” said Emma, smiling, and pushing the paper towards
Harriet—“it is for you. You do it very ill. She could have made an inquiry or two, as to the expedition and the
expense of the Irish mails;—it was at her tongue’s end—but she
abstained. Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and
who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business
the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant
smile,--

“I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if
he had not wished to avoid a certain gentleman here.”

This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by
Elizabeth; and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for
Wickham’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling
of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate
disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to
the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make. He has not an ill-natured look. Jennings could supply to her the conversation
she missed; although the latter was an everlasting talker, and from the
first had regarded her with a kindness which ensured her a large share
of her discourse. When she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance, and courting the
good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would
have been a disgrace; when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself,
but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected
their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage, the difference, the
change was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could
hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible. Churchill’s
state, however, as many were ready to remind her, was liable to such
sudden variation as might disappoint her nephew in the most reasonable
dependence—and Mrs. He
really felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion; for the very
exertion to which he had limited the performance of his promise to his
father was by this arrangement rendered impracticable.—The furniture
was all sent around by water. mortifying and
humiliating must be the origin of those regrets, which _she_ could wish
her not to indulge! Her report was highly favourable. I
cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen in the whole range of my
acquaintance that are really accomplished.”

“Nor I, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley. Secrecy may be advisable; but still I cannot help wondering at
its being practiced by him.”

“Do not blame him, however, for departing from his character, where the
deviation is necessary. Mr. Eltons get acquainted—they do indeed—and
really it is strange; it is out of the common course that what is so
evidently, so palpably desirable—what courts the pre-arrangement of
other people, should so immediately shape itself into the proper form. John Knightley proved more talkative than his brother. I am
perfectly satisfied. Mrs. Mr. Approve my charade and my
intentions in the same glance.’

May its approval beam in that soft eye! They were all disengaged and all
happy.—The preparatory interest of this dinner, however, was not yet
over. Before she had committed
herself by any public profession of eternal friendship for Jane
Fairfax, or done more towards a recantation of past prejudices and
errors, than saying to Mr. I
remember her perfectly. It was absolutely
necessary, therefore, to think of something; and in this emergency
recollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling
curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty
departure, she observed,--

“How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Knightley did not begin seriously, he was obliged to proceed so,
for his proposal was caught at with delight; and the “Oh! Oh, Lizzy, to
know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear
family! Mr. Everybody has a way
of their own. Only one page more. I cannot bear the thoughts
of making him so miserable, as I know the very mention of such a thing
would do. Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil? Mr. He came, and in such very good time, that the ladies were none of them
dressed. And I hope she will be better off in one respect, and not be
induced to go away after it has been her home so long.”

The following day brought news from Richmond to throw every thing else
into the background. His situation indeed was more than commonly
joyful. “Dear little
soul, how I do love her!”

“You are very kind,” said Lady Middleton to Elinor; “and as you really
like the work, perhaps you will be as well pleased not to cut in till
another rubber, or will you take your chance now?”

Elinor joyfully profited by the first of these proposals, and thus by a
little of that address which Marianne could never condescend to
practise, gained her own end, and pleased Lady Middleton at the same
time. When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be
done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any
intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every
subject in so decisive a manner as proved that she was not used to have
her judgment controverted. Oh! Weston, employing him to write for you one day?”

“He chose to say he was employed”—

“Well, well, I have that note; and can shew it after dinner to convince
Mr. Darcy’s look
and behaviour. Bragge’s is the one I would most wish
to see you in.”

“Colonel and Mrs. “Come, Darcy,” said he, “I must have you dance. You give me
fresh life and vigour. Weston had been so very earnest in his
entreaties for her arriving there as soon as possible after themselves,
for the purpose of taking her opinion as to the propriety and comfort
of the rooms before any other persons came, that she could not refuse
him, and must therefore spend some quiet interval in the young man’s
company. He hoped they would all excuse the smallness of the
party, and could assure them it should never happen so again. The arrival of letters was
the first grand object of every morning’s impatience. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be
of short duration. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes
separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their
aunt. and Mrs. “If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his
friend within a few days,” she added, “I shall know how to understand
it. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to
introduce his friend, Mr. Perry drank tea
with Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the
evening; (by-the-bye, Mrs. Emma was very willing now to acquit her of having seduced Mr. Recovering himself, however, shortly,
he turned to his partner, and said,--

“Sir William’s interruption has made me forget what we were talking
of.”

“I do not think we were speaking at all. With a glance she saw that
he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness,
she began as they met to admire the beauty of the place; but she had not
got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” when some unlucky
recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pemberley from
her might be mischievously construed. “I did myself the honour of calling in Berkeley Street last Tuesday,
and very much regretted that I was not fortunate enough to find
yourselves and Mrs. The
weather soon improved enough for those to move who must move; and Mr. And all this has been going on at a time,
when, as you know too well, it has not been my only unhappiness. I cannot imagine that she will not be continually insulting her visitor
with praise, encouragement, and offers of service; that she will not be
continually detailing her magnificent intentions, from the procuring
her a permanent situation to the including her in those delightful
exploring parties which are to take place in the barouche-landau.”

“Jane Fairfax has feeling,” said Mr. I
have a great regard for Mr. She found that she had been misled
by the careful, the considerate attention of her daughter, to think the
attachment, which once she had so well understood, much slighter in
reality, than she had been wont to believe, or than it was now proved
to be. But I cannot imagine how I could be so off my
guard. My aunt’s intelligence had given me hope,
and I was determined at once to know everything.”

“Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy,
for she loves to be of use. is not disposed
to depend upon their marriage: he shook his head when I expressed my
hopes, and said he feared W. And just then I could not hear any more, for my cousin
called from below to tell me Mrs. He was received by Mrs. But such as they were, it may be well supposed how eagerly
she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited. “My father and Maria are to come to me in March,” added Charlotte, “and
I hope you will consent to be of the party. How does Miss Smith do? “You are a good girl,” he replied, “and I have great pleasure in
thinking you will be so happily settled. Weston undertakes to direct the whole.”

“There, papa!—Now you must be satisfied—Our own dear Mrs. It will be giving him
so much pleasure! The friends from whom she had just parted, though
very good sort of people, must be doing her harm. Knightley was at
Hartfield yesterday, and spoke of it as for Saturday.”

“Oh! My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light
it places Mr. A young lady who faints, must be recovered; questions must be answered,
and surprizes be explained. Hurst, who had
married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider
his house as her home when it suited her. But these things happen so often! But _she_ does every thing well.”

Marianne could not bear this.—She was already greatly displeased with
Mrs. She
concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally
fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no
chance of it. But my mother, my dearest, kindest mother,—I
feel the justice of what Elinor has urged, and if she were to be made
less happy, less comfortable by our absence—Oh! Mr. “Mr. They met readily and smiling, but with a
consciousness which at first allowed little to be said; and having all
sat down again, there was for some time such a blank in the circle,
that Emma began to doubt whether the wish now indulged, which she had
long felt, of seeing Frank Churchill once more, and of seeing him with
Jane, would yield its proportion of pleasure. Their intended excursion to Whitwell turned out very different from
what Elinor had expected. It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. I never thought Edward so
stubborn, so unfeeling before. Sir John was ready to like anybody, and though Mr. I could not
bear it for Emma!—Emma is not strong. _Edward_ Ferrars.”

She dared not look up;—but her mother and Marianne both turned their
eyes on him. Churchill that he was prevented
coming.—Emma looked at Harriet while the point was under consideration;
she behaved very well, and betrayed no emotion. I do not like to boast
of my own child; but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybody
better looking. Bennet deigned not to make any reply; but, unable to contain
herself, began scolding one of her daughters. “Well, Miss Woodhouse,” said Harriet, when they had quitted the house,
and after waiting in vain for her friend to begin; “Well, Miss
Woodhouse, (with a gentle sigh,) what do you think of her?—Is not she
very charming?”

There was a little hesitation in Emma’s answer. Darcy is not in the least to blame; that he cannot bear
to hear George Wickham mentioned; and that though my brother thought he
could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he
was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way. How attentive she is, to think of
every body!—Thank you, my dear, for showing it me. If Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many years
the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good conduct in
the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to be of service
to him; and on George Wickham, who was his godson, his kindness was
therefore liberally bestowed. Her own happiness, and her own spirits, were at least very certain; and
she joined Mrs. You have hit upon the very thing to please
me.”

Mr. It is such a spur to one’s genius, such an
opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. Harriet, here comes a very sudden trial of our stability in good
thoughts. Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose
affection had brought her into public at an early age. Do let me hear what she says.’”

Emma’s politeness was at hand directly, to say, with smiling interest—

“Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately? I am glad he
can afford it. He did so, but very soon stopt again to say, “the pianoforte! His emotion on entering the room, in seeing her altered looks, and in
receiving the pale hand which she immediately held out to him, was
such, as, in Elinor’s conjecture, must arise from something more than
his affection for Marianne, or the consciousness of its being known to
others; and she soon discovered in his melancholy eye and varying
complexion as he looked at her sister, the probable recurrence of many
past scenes of misery to his mind, brought back by that resemblance
between Marianne and Eliza already acknowledged, and now strengthened
by the hollow eye, the sickly skin, the posture of reclining weakness,
and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation. “Now I am quite happy,” said she, “for you will be as happy as myself. I
could not help being provoked; for after all my pains, and when I had
really made a very good likeness of it—(Mrs. I undertake the commission. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth
his while. That is what she writes about. Pratt’s family, with any satisfaction. the good Bateses—I am quite ashamed of myself—but you mention them
in most of your letters. Elton, that the door was to be lawfully shut on them,
and that they were to have a tête-à-tête drive. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she
and her children should go to London at the same time that Mr. Lady
Catherine’s unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of
removing all my doubts. Dashwood again assured him that no alteration of the kind should
be attempted. Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Cole gave me
a hint of it six weeks ago.”

He stopped.—Emma felt her foot pressed by Mrs. Does Elinor expect him already?”

“I have never mentioned it to her, but of course she must.”

“I rather think you are mistaken, for when I was talking to her
yesterday of getting a new grate for the spare bedchamber, she observed
that there was no immediate hurry for it, as it was not likely that the
room would be wanted for some time.”

“How strange this is! He had
misinterpreted the feelings which had kept her face averted, and her
tongue motionless. There was hardly time to talk over
the first letter from Enscombe before “Mr. Palmer’s, where I have been
dining.”

“Oh, you did; well, and how do they all do at their house? We may as well wait, perhaps, till the
circumstance occurs, before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour
thereupon. The wish of distinguishing her, as far as civility permitted, was very
evident, though it could not often proceed beyond a look. ‘I am ruined for ever in their
opinion,’ said I to myself: ‘I am shut out for ever from their society,
they already think me an unprincipled fellow, this letter will only
make them think me a blackguard one.’ Such were my reasonings, as, in a
sort of desperate carelessness, I copied my wife’s words, and parted
with the last relics of Marianne. He was
thinking. My feelings are at
present in a state of dreadful indecision; I wish to acquit you, but
certainty on either side will be ease to what I now suffer. I like them extremely. I certainly get better and
better.—Now for it.”

Mrs. A note was just then brought in, and laid on the table. Jennings, perhaps satisfied with the
partial justification of her forebodings which had been found in their
late alarm, allowed herself to trust in his judgment, and admitted,
with unfeigned joy, and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness, the
probability of an entire recovery. I do suspect that he is not
really necessary to my happiness. “This is wholly
unexpected; I had not an idea of it.”

Mr. Ah! One cannot wonder that so
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
should think highly of himself. it is very
fatiguing to him! His understanding and
temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. She had always felt that Charlotte’s opinion of matrimony was
not exactly like her own; but she could not have supposed it possible
that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better
feeling to worldly advantage. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments. What shall I say?”

Emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the answer, and
advised its being written directly, which was agreed to, in the hope of
her assistance; and though Emma continued to protest against any
assistance being wanted, it was in fact given in the formation of every
sentence. I would rather
not be tempted. Weston had thought differently; he
was extremely anxious to shew his approbation to Miss Fairfax and her
family, and did not conceive that any suspicion could be excited by it;
or if it were, that it would be of any consequence; for “such things,”
he observed, “always got about.” Emma smiled, and felt that Mr. And it is so cheerful a place,
that it could not fail of being of use to Mr. “Yes--if Darcy does not put it off again. A woman is not to marry a man merely because she is asked, or
because he is attached to her, and can write a tolerable letter.”

“Oh no;—and it is but a short letter too.”

Emma felt the bad taste of her friend, but let it pass with a “very
true; and it would be a small consolation to her, for the clownish
manner which might be offending her every hour of the day, to know that
her husband could write a good letter.”

“Oh! They could go there again with them in the
autumn. I
assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an
agreeable and sensible young man without having a wish beyond it. I
think you understand me, therefore.”

An arch look expressed—“I understand you well enough;” but she said
only, “Miss Fairfax is reserved.”

“I always told you she was—a little; but you will soon overcome all
that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome, all that has its
foundation in diffidence. Emma knew that she had, but would not own it; and Mr. Ferrars look well?”

“Yes, ma’am, she said how she was very well; and to my mind she was
always a very handsome young lady—and she seemed vastly contented.”

Mrs. Absolutely insufferable! She was not immediately able to say
anything, and even when her spirits were recovered, she debated for a
short time, on the answer it would be most proper to give. Mr. I would much
rather have been merry than wise.”

“If I can come again, we are still to have our ball. At length, every idea seemed to fail him; and after standing a few
moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took
leave. “Of his sense and his goodness,” continued Elinor, “no one can, I
think, be in doubt, who has seen him often enough to engage him in
unreserved conversation. Mrs. “But you are always kind.”

There was no bearing such an “always;” and to break through her
dreadful gratitude, Emma made the direct inquiry of—

“Where—may I ask?—is Miss Fairfax going?”

“To a Mrs. He had not the power of accepting it. my dear,” said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, “it is not Lady
Catherine. Collins’s side, and as many bows on Sir William’s, they departed. Very well. “Hum”—said Mrs. “I shall never let that book go out of my own hands,” said she. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eye towards
Mr. “Poor Marianne!” said her brother to Colonel Brandon, in a low voice,
as soon as he could secure his attention: “She has not such good health
as her sister,—she is very nervous,—she has not Elinor’s
constitution;—and one must allow that there is something very trying to
a young woman who _has been_ a beauty in the loss of her personal
attractions. “When I see him again,” said Elinor to herself, as the door shut him
out, “I shall see him the husband of Lucy.”

And with this pleasing anticipation, she sat down to reconsider the
past, recall the words and endeavour to comprehend all the feelings of
Edward; and, of course, to reflect on her own with discontent. Few people who have so
compassionate a heart! And if poor little Anna Weston is to be
spoiled, it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much for her
as you have done for me, except falling in love with her when she is
thirteen.”

“How often, when you were a girl, have you said to me, with one of your
saucy looks—‘Mr. “Books--oh no!--I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same
feelings.”

“I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be
no want of subject. “Come Miss Woodhouse, Miss Otway, Miss Fairfax, what are you all
doing?—Come Emma, set your companions the example. Weston was ready, on the first meeting, to
consider the subject in the most serviceable light—first, as a settled,
and, secondly, as a good one—well aware of the nearly equal importance
of the two recommendations to Mr. John
Knightley, their five children, and a competent number of
nursery-maids, all reaching Hartfield in safety. Poor soul! Weston some inimitable
figure-pieces in her drawing-room, at Randalls?”

Yes, good man!—thought Emma—but what has all that to do with taking
likenesses? Perry, the apothecary, on the subject. Elton as he stood before them,
could impair.—Perhaps, indeed, at that time she scarcely saw Mr. */

“My dear Niece,

     “I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole
     morning to answering it, as I foresee that a _little_ writing will
     not comprise what I have to tell you. Mr. It must be his own doing; he is his own master. and I can account
for it only in one way; you are not yourself, or you could not speak
either to me, or of Harriet, in such a manner. And even when it
was settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in
compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered by
receiving the invitation from Mr. After some opposition, Marianne yielded to her sister’s entreaties, and
consented to go out with her and Mrs. He looked
rather doubtingly—rather confused; said something about
“honour,”—glanced at Emma and at Harriet, and then seeing the book open
on the table, took it up, and examined it very attentively. Her thoughts were all fixed on that
one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. She is
a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest; but
I will _make_ her know it.”

“Pardon me for interrupting you, madam,” cried Mr. The sisters set out at a pace, slow as the feebleness of Marianne in an
exercise hitherto untried since her illness required; and they had
advanced only so far beyond the house as to admit a full view of the
hill, the important hill behind, when pausing with her eyes turned
towards it, Marianne calmly said,—

“There, exactly there,”—pointing with one hand, “on that projecting
mound,—there I fell; and there I first saw Willoughby.”

Her voice sunk with the word, but presently reviving she added,

“I am thankful to find that I can look with so little pain on the spot! Mr. Yes, Friday or Saturday; she cannot say which, because Colonel
Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days. “It certainly is a most iniquitous affair,” said Mr. Her fears, he had no courage, no confidence to
attempt the removal of:—he listened to them in silent despondence;—but
her difficulties were instantly obviated, for with a readiness that
seemed to speak the occasion, and the service pre-arranged in his mind,
he offered himself as the messenger who should fetch Mrs. And if that some one should
be the very he whom, of all others, I could least bear—but I will not
stay to rob myself of all your compassionate goodwill, by showing that
where I have most injured I can least forgive. Harris, who
attended her every day, still talked boldly of a speedy recovery, and
Miss Dashwood was equally sanguine; but the expectation of the others
was by no means so cheerful. They lived beyond their income, but still it was nothing in comparison
of Enscombe: she did not cease to love her husband, but she wanted at
once to be the wife of Captain Weston, and Miss Churchill of Enscombe. “He is now gone into the
army,” she added; “but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.”

Mrs. To walk by the side of this child, and talk
to and question her, was the most natural thing in the world, or would
have been the most natural, had she been acting just then without
design; and by this means the others were still able to keep ahead,
without any obligation of waiting for her. I know what thorough justice you will do it, and have
scarcely a doubt of its happy effect.—I think we shall never materially
disagree about the writer again; but I will not delay you by a long
preface.—We are quite well.—This letter has been the cure of all the
little nervousness I have been feeling lately.—I did not quite like
your looks on Tuesday, but it was an ungenial morning; and though you
will never own being affected by weather, I think every body feels a
north-east wind.—I felt for your dear father very much in the storm of
Tuesday afternoon and yesterday morning, but had the comfort of hearing
last night, by Mr. Campbell, I
have no idea that you will suppose her talents can be unknown.”

“Oh! Short had
been the notice—short their meeting; he was gone; and Emma felt so
sorry to part, and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from
his absence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorry, and feeling it
too much. In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma should approach her. Sometimes I thought it had been, but it never
was.”

“Yet you wrote to him?”

“Yes: could that be wrong after all that had passed? It was but an effusion of lively
spirits. Elinor attempted no more. The distress of her sister too, particularly a
favourite, was before her;—and as for their mother, when Mrs. Woodhouse, always the last to make his way in conversation; “then give
me leave to assure you that you will find her a very agreeable young
lady. Weston naming one
family of cousins who must be included, and another of very old
acquaintance who could not be left out, it became a certainty that the
five couple would be at least ten, and a very interesting speculation
in what possible manner they could be disposed of. I
am amazingly glad you did not keep to _your word_.”

Elinor perfectly understood her, and was forced to use all her
self-command to make it appear that she did _not_. But tell me, what did you come down to
Netherfield for? Elton, indeed, shewed no unwillingness
to mix, and be as agreeable as they could; but during the two whole
hours that were spent on the hill, there seemed a principle of
separation, between the other parties, too strong for any fine
prospects, or any cold collation, or any cheerful Mr. Ah! Knightley, than with Frank Churchill? Family pride, and _filial_ pride, for he is very proud of what his
father was, have done this. Darcy might have done as
well.”

“Mr. Weston, I have very little doubt that my opinion
will be decidedly in his favour. I say, sir,”
turning to Mr. They solaced their wretchedness,
however, by duets after supper; while he could find no better relief to
his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every
possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister. When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them
a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;
and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to courtesy and hold out
her hand to both. He had found the law a most unprofitable study,
and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would present
him to the living in question--of which he trusted there could be little
doubt, as he was well assured that I had no other person to provide for,
and I could not have forgotten my revered father’s intentions. Pray do not talk of that odious man. You know
what he thinks of Cowper and Scott; you are certain of his estimating
their beauties as he ought, and you have received every assurance of
his admiring Pope no more than is proper. ‘But,’ said I, ‘to be quite honest, I do not think I can live without
something of a musical society. “But why were you not there, Edward?—Why did you not come?”

“I was engaged elsewhere.”

“Engaged! Collins’s triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete. They are very, very kind in their visits. But,
though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his
behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. I cannot think of it without abhorrence.”

“We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that
evening,” said Elizabeth. Weston. Collins, you must send a servant
with them. It was a
pleasant fertile spot, well wooded, and rich in pasture. Jennings asked her, as soon as she
appeared, if she had not been to Allenham; and Mrs. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that
his affection might be re-animated, and the influence of his friends
successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane’s
attractions. Is Perry going to set up his carriage, Frank? I do
suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself, and that it
was only as an excuse for assisting them.”

“Very likely,” said Emma—“nothing more likely. He had not seen me then above twice, for it was
before I left school. She had been decided in
wishing for a Miss Weston. I was prepared to meet you with the
pleasure which our separation naturally produced, with the familiarity
which our intimacy at Barton appeared to me to justify. Knightley. The
horses arrived, even before they were expected, and Colonel Brandon
only pressing her hand with a look of solemnity, and a few words spoken
too low to reach her ear, hurried into the carriage. Mr. Willoughby, I advise you at present to return to Combe. Westons aside as much as she can.”

“Me, my love,” cried his wife, hearing and understanding only in part.—
“Are you talking about me?—I am sure nobody ought to be, or can be, a
greater advocate for matrimony than I am; and if it had not been for
the misery of her leaving Hartfield, I should never have thought of
Miss Taylor but as the most fortunate woman in the world; and as to
slighting Mr. Elton made his appearance. Knightley’s excessive curiosity
to know what this word might be, made him seize every possible moment
for darting his eye towards it, and it was not long before he saw it to
be _Dixon_. All that she could hope, was that Edward would
not often expose her or himself to the distress of hearing Marianne’s
mistaken warmth, nor to the repetition of any other part of the pain
that had attended their recent meeting—and this she had every reason to
expect. “Lizzy,” said he, “what are you doing? Not a syllable was uttered by
either; and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when
Bingley, who as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and,
whispering a few words to her sister, ran out of the room. The unhappiness produced by the
knowledge of that engagement had been a little put aside by Elizabeth
Martin’s calling at Mrs. Oh! He, who had always inspired in herself a respect
which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open
pleasantry. Knightley looking ill,” turning her eyes with
affectionate anxiety towards her husband. The distance is nothing,
when one has a motive; only three miles. Mrs. Harris was punctual in his second visit;—but he came to be
disappointed in his hopes of what the last would produce. Jennings, with a thoroughly good-humoured concern for
its cause, admitted the excuse most readily, and Elinor, after seeing
her safe off, returned to Marianne, whom she found attempting to rise
from the bed, and whom she reached just in time to prevent her from
falling on the floor, faint and giddy from a long want of proper rest
and food; for it was many days since she had any appetite, and many
nights since she had really slept; and now, when her mind was no longer
supported by the fever of suspense, the consequence of all this was
felt in an aching head, a weakened stomach, and a general nervous
faintness. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged
that the necessity of his absence _had_ been self-imposed. There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at
the will of others. “Perry!” said he to Emma, and trying, as he spoke, to catch Miss
Fairfax’s eye. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill
from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and
it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the
dark. They battled it together for a long time, which
     was more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it
     deserved. I praised the fair lady too, and altogether sent
him away very happy. Knightley’s pretensions) with the skill of such an observer on
such a question as herself, that he had spoken it hastily and in anger,
she was able to believe, that he had rather said what he wished
resentfully to be true, than what he knew any thing about. “You certainly do,” she replied with a smile; “but it does not follow
that the interruption must be unwelcome.”

“I should be sorry, indeed, if it were. Look
at her. John Knightley only was in mute
astonishment.—That a man who might have spent his evening quietly at
home after a day of business in London, should set off again, and walk
half a mile to another man’s house, for the sake of being in mixed
company till bed-time, of finishing his day in the efforts of civility
and the noise of numbers, was a circumstance to strike him deeply. It will be quite delightful,
I declare! But it is his gratitude on Harriet’s account.”




CHAPTER VII


The very day of Mr. All that Mrs. Bennet coolly observed,--

“From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two
of the silliest girls in the country. as to all that, of course nothing can be thought of yet. Harriet
listened submissively, and said “it was very true—it was just as Miss
Woodhouse described—it was not worth while to think about them—and she
would not think about them any longer” but no change of subject could
avail, and the next half-hour saw her as anxious and restless about the
Eltons as before. Weston, tell me at once.—Something has happened in Brunswick
Square. Elton’s being in the
fairest way of falling in love, if not in love already. How well you put it on!—so
gratified! Weston was exceedingly disappointed—much more disappointed, in
fact, than her husband, though her dependence on seeing the young man
had been so much more sober: but a sanguine temper, though for ever
expecting more good than occurs, does not always pay for its hopes by
any proportionate depression. Lady Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs. The Doctor is no beau of mine.”

“Aye, aye, that is very pretty talking—but it won’t do—the Doctor is
the man, I see.”

“No, indeed!” replied her cousin, with affected earnestness, “and I beg
you will contradict it, if you ever hear it talked of.”

Mrs. Willoughby took his usual place between the two elder Miss Dashwoods. In spite of having been at St. GARDINER.”

“Is it possible?” cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. Do try to find
it out, Miss Woodhouse. and I always thought you meant it.”

He could say no more; and with the hope of Hartfield to reward him,
returned with Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, “then she is better off than
many girls. “It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,” he added,
“which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. The evil of the actual disparity in their ages (and Mr. and Mrs. They all looked exceedingly foolish; and Edward seemed to
have as great an inclination to walk out of the room again, as to
advance farther into it. She shall hear my opinion.”

Mrs. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours
in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well in
her hopes as her fears; and after talking with her in this manner till
dinner was on table, they left her to vent all her feelings on the
housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters. I consider him, on the contrary, as a very
respectable man, who has every body’s good word, and nobody’s notice;
who has more money than he can spend, more time than he knows how to
employ, and two new coats every year.”

“Add to which,” cried Marianne, “that he has neither genius, taste, nor
spirit. Delightful,
charming, superior, first circles, spheres, lines, ranks, every
thing—and Mrs. _He_ had done it. He assured her that, as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent
to it; that his chief object was, by delicate attentions, to recommend
himself to her; and that he should therefore make a point of remaining
close to her the whole evening. /* RIGHT “Gracechurch Street, _Sept. “I hope,” said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery the
next day, “you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this
desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue;
and if you can compass it, to cure the younger girls of running after
the officers. Ferrars’s creation, preserved her from all dependence upon her
caprice, or any solicitude for her good opinion. Harriet would be anxiety enough; she need no
longer be unhappy about Jane, whose troubles and whose ill-health
having, of course, the same origin, must be equally under cure.—Her
days of insignificance and evil were over.—She would soon be well, and
happy, and prosperous.—Emma could now imagine why her own attentions
had been slighted. She was so surprized she did
not know what to do. I know it to be a
most respectable, agreeable corps; and my friend Denny tempted me
further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great
attentions and excellent acquaintance Meryton had procured them. Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there proved to have been a prior
acquaintance between him and Mrs. Elinor was much more hurt by Marianne’s warmth than
she had been by what produced it; but Colonel Brandon’s eyes, as they
were fixed on Marianne, declared that he noticed only what was amiable
in it, the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a sister
slighted in the smallest point. Whatever Lucy might think
about it herself, you know, it was no business of other people to set
it down for certain.”

“I never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before, I assure you,”
said Elinor. But Mr. She knew not what to think, or how to
account for it. Bennet followed her,
saying,--

“I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that
disagreeable man all to yourself; but I hope you will not mind it. Mr. Have patience with me, I shall soon have done.—She closed with this
offer, resolving to break with me entirely, and wrote the next day to
tell me that we never were to meet again.—_She_ _felt_ _the_
_engagement_ _to_ _be_ _a_ _source_ _of_ _repentance_ _and_ _misery_
_to_ _each_: _she_ _dissolved_ _it_.—This letter reached me on the very
morning of my poor aunt’s death. A
walk before breakfast does me good.”

“Not a walk in the rain, I should imagine.”

“No, but it did not absolutely rain when I set out.”

Mr. I do assure you that nothing would surprise me
more than to hear of their being going to be married.”

“For shame, for shame, Miss Dashwood! No one, I believe, can blame her more than she is disposed to
blame herself. But you were humble. I trust, at least, that you
do not think Mr. He had certainly formed such a plan; and without
meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from Miss
Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern
for the welfare of his friend. TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON. I could
almost assert that you had _named_ Mr. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write
to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. Miss Taylor, if you had not
married, you would have staid at home with me.”

“Well, sir,” cried Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their
personal invitation for the long expected ball at Netherfield, which was
fixed for the following Tuesday. And though, perhaps, Marianne may not seem exactly the
person to attract him, yet I think it would altogether be advisable for
you to have them now frequently staying with you, for as Colonel
Brandon seems a great deal at home, nobody can tell what may happen;
for, when people are much thrown together, and see little of anybody
else,—and it will always be in your power to set her off to advantage,
and so forth. There is nothing extravagant in _their_
housekeeping, I dare say.”

“No, nothing at all.”

“A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Lucy’s marriage, the unceasing and reasonable wonder among them all,
formed of course one of the earliest discussions of the lovers;—and
Elinor’s particular knowledge of each party made it appear to her in
every view, as one of the most extraordinary and unaccountable
circumstances she had ever heard. “One ought to
use the same caution, perhaps, in judging of the conduct of any one
individual of any one family; but Enscombe, I believe, certainly must
not be judged by general rules: _she_ is so very unreasonable; and
every thing gives way to her.”

“But she is so fond of the nephew: he is so very great a favourite. They walked together. A very
friendly inquiry after Miss Fairfax, she hoped, might lead the way to a
return of old feelings. Nothing could be more delightful! “A place, too, with which so many of your
acquaintance are connected. Bingley with having promised on his first coming
into the country to give a ball at Netherfield. Their reception at home was most kind. “I shall never be invited to Abbey-Mill again,” was said in rather a
sorrowful tone. He was warm in his
reprobation of Mr. I remember
her telling me at the ball, that I owed Mrs. Bingley’s will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must
say that I hate the very sight of him.”

Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. Elinor scolded him, harshly as ladies always scold the imprudence which
compliments themselves, for having spent so much time with them at
Norland, when he must have felt his own inconstancy. She has talked of it
since. “You did behave
very shamefully. How I long to see her! I am extremely sorry for it; for I know
him to be a very good-hearted creature; as well-meaning a fellow
perhaps, as any in the world. Look up
to it, and be tranquil if you can. Frank Churchill and Miss Smith making their
party quite complete. No,
he had been in Devonshire a fortnight. Robert Martin would
never have proceeded so far, if he had not felt persuaded of her not
being disinclined to him. Either in the morning or evening of every day, excepting one,
have we seen either Mr. In a morning’s excursion to Exeter, they had met with two young ladies,
whom Mrs. Elton. I do not deserve it. Bingley, to assure him how happy
he would make them, by eating a family dinner with them at any time,
without the ceremony of a formal invitation. How could you have
consoled her! Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tea, and by his manner
of looking round the room for Marianne, Elinor immediately fancied that
he neither expected nor wished to see her there, and, in short, that he
was already aware of what occasioned her absence. Darcy was eyeing him with
unrestrained wonder; and when at last Mr. Elinor wished that the same forbearance could have extended towards
herself, but that was impossible, and she was obliged to listen day
after day to the indignation of them all. His letter was soon
despatched; for though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in
its execution. Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off
together. Charlotte did not stay much
longer; and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard. Not aware of their being in town, however, I
blundered on Sir John, I believe, the first day of his coming, and the
day after I had called at Mrs. They were sneering and
negligent. They both set off; and the conjectures of the remaining three
continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown
open, and their visitor entered. Scarcely had she so determined it, when the figure of a man on
horseback drew her eyes to the window. do not you know who Miss Williams is? Knightley to throw cold water on every
thing.—Extremely disagreeable! what a bloom of full health,
and such a pretty height and size; such a firm and upright figure! I have been meditating on the very great pleasure
which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.”

Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he
would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections. Depend upon it, a
man of six or seven-and-twenty can take care of himself.”




CHAPTER II


Mr. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and
rings, joined now and then in her brother’s conversation with Miss
Bennet. I say, Jane, what a perfect character you and I should make, if
we could be shaken together. Poor man! Fanny, rejoicing in her escape, and proud of the ready wit that had
procured it, wrote the next morning to Lucy, to request her company and
her sister’s, for some days, in Harley Street, as soon as Lady
Middleton could spare them. You were all gone I do not know where. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I
come.”

Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment. Marianne was
vexed at it for her sister’s sake, and turned her eyes towards Elinor
to see how she bore these attacks, with an earnestness which gave
Elinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place raillery
as Mrs. But they had no curiosity to
see how Mr. It was over at last, however. From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only one day after
     ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for
     them. I will take care of
myself, and of Mr. They agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one
     daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others: for
     who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect
     themselves with such a family? when I went away, I am sure
I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! But
farther than this you must _not_ believe. Knightley. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the
     means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to
     apologize for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make
     them every possible amends; but of this hereafter. That she was not immediately
ready, Emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves; she had
not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch it without
emotion; she must reason herself into the power of performance; and
Emma could not but pity such feelings, whatever their origin, and could
not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again. The picture!—How eager he had been about the picture!—and the
charade!—and an hundred other circumstances;—how clearly they had
seemed to point at Harriet. Jennings was the widow of a man
who had got all his money in a low way; and Fanny and Mrs. I am sure she will be married to Mr. The next morning, as she was going down stairs, she was met by her
father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand. “Upon my soul,” he added, “I believe it is nothing more; and so I often
tell my mother, when she is grieving about it. Bingley’s being imposed on than that
Mr. “’Tis too much!” she added, “by far too much. It is a very large one, I know; and when I come to see you, I
hope you will have new-furnished it, for it wanted it very much when I
was there six years ago.”

Marianne turned away in great confusion. No husbands and wives,” with so interesting a
consciousness, that Emma began to consider whether she had not better
leave them together at once. Any thing else I should be most happy to do, at your
command—but my dancing days are over.”

Mrs. Neither father nor
mother could promote, and the daughter could not endure it. Robert Ferrars. my love, I could not then talk of hope to him or to myself. I
assure you I have. And Mrs. It is a sort of prologue to the
play, a motto to the chapter; and will be soon followed by
matter-of-fact prose.”

“It is a sort of thing which nobody could have expected. “I had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself, for I am fond of
superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of
London would agree with Lady Lucas.”

He paused in hopes of an answer: but his companion was not disposed to
make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was
struck with the notion of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to
her,--

“My dear Miss Eliza, why are not you dancing? Bingley’s defence of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but
since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt
the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture still to think of
both gentlemen as I did before.”

She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on
which there could be no difference of sentiment. “Oh, they are talking of
their favourite beaux, I dare say.”

“No sister,” cried Lucy, “you are mistaken there, our favourite beaux
are _not_ great coxcombs.”

“I can answer for it that Miss Dashwood’s is not,” said Mrs. Knightley loves to find fault with me, you know—in a
joke—it is all a joke. I am charged with a most agreeable
office (breathing rather faster than usual as she spoke.) Colonel
Brandon, who was here only ten minutes ago, has desired me to say, that
understanding you mean to take orders, he has great pleasure in
offering you the living of Delaford now just vacant, and only wishes it
were more valuable. _He_ shall be
mercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish.”

“No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. Knightley, how could you
possibly have heard it? Perhaps, however, he is kept silent
by his fear of offending, and I shall, therefore, give him a hint, by a
line to Oxford, that his sister and I both think a letter of proper
submission from him, addressed perhaps to Fanny, and by her shown to
her mother, might not be taken amiss; for we all know the tenderness of
Mrs. At any rate it would be most ungenerous. Palmer might be able to give some
more particular account of Willoughby’s general character, than could
be gathered from the Middletons’ partial acquaintance with him; and she
was eager to gain from any one, such a confirmation of his merits as
might remove the possibility of fear from Marianne. You will have my
sketches, some time or other, to look at—or my tour to read—or my poem. I have just as much
right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.”

In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make
her resigned. These
were pleasant feelings, and she walked about and indulged them till it
was necessary to do as the others did, and collect round the
strawberry-beds.—The whole party were assembled, excepting Frank
Churchill, who was expected every moment from Richmond; and Mrs. I have the greatest dislike in the
world to that sort of thing. But you have chosen your fault well. It is like a woman’s writing.”

This was not submitted to by either lady. A most
delightful place! I merely called, because I would not
pass the door without inquiring after Mrs. Goddard’s till it were certain that Miss
Smith’s disorder had no infection? “How do you do my dear?”—said she in a voice of great compassion to
Marianne, who turned away her face without attempting to answer. “Go to him, Elinor,” she cried, as soon as she could speak, “and force
him to come to me. I must make myself very
disagreeable, or she would not have said such a thing to an old
friend.”

“I like your plan,” cried Mr. To Hartfield,
if you please, Mrs. Its character as a ball-room caught him; and instead of
passing on, he stopt for several minutes at the two superior sashed
windows which were open, to look in and contemplate its capabilities,
and lament that its original purpose should have ceased. Three thousand pounds! And his woods,—I have not
seen such timber any where in Dorsetshire, as there is now standing in
Delaford Hanger! “Emma,” said she, “this paper is worse than I expected. Hope had already entered; and feeling all its anxious
flutter, she bent over her sister to watch—she hardly knew for what. No time was to be
lost in undeceiving her, in making her acquainted with the real truth,
and in endeavouring to bring her to hear it talked of by others,
without betraying that she felt any uneasiness for her sister, or any
resentment against Edward. “I will not ask your opinion of it as a composition,” said Edward.—“For
worlds would not I have had a letter of hers seen by _you_ in former
days.—In a sister it is bad enough, but in a wife!—how I have blushed
over the pages of her writing!—and I believe I may say that since the
first half year of our foolish—business—this is the only letter I ever
received from her, of which the substance made me any amends for the
defect of the style.”

“However it may have come about,” said Elinor, after a pause,—“they are
certainly married. Jennings most heartily in her expectation of their
being all comfortably together in Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas. Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father. At seven o’clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly asleep, she joined
Mrs. Your Ladyship wants Mr. Frank Churchill pass through Bath as well as Oxford?”—was a
question, however, which did not augur much. Frank
Churchill, I must tell you my mother’s spectacles have never been in
fault since; the rivet never came out again. They passed some months in great happiness at Dawlish; for she
had many relations and old acquaintances to cut—and he drew several
plans for magnificent cottages;—and from thence returning to town,
procured the forgiveness of Mrs. Should not
you, Mr. It was borne in the latter with decent
philosophy. Lord! You are
not well enough; you cannot go yourself.”

Elizabeth hesitated; but her knees trembled under her, and she felt how
little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. From perfect misery to perfect happiness!”

“It is very natural. Do not let us be too solemn on the business. It suggested no other
surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit so composedly by,
without claiming a share in what was passing. “I have heard her speak of the acquaintance,” said Emma; “she is a very
elegant young woman.”

He agreed to it, but with so quiet a “Yes,” as inclined her almost to
doubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be a very distinct sort
of elegance for the fashionable world, if Jane Fairfax could be thought
only ordinarily gifted with it. Weston added, “that he could only allow himself time to hurry to
Highbury, after breakfast, and take leave of the few friends there whom
he could suppose to feel any interest in him; and that he might be
expected at Hartfield very soon.”

This wretched note was the finale of Emma’s breakfast. After a pause of several minutes, their silence
was broken, by his asking her in a voice of some agitation, when he was
to congratulate her on the acquisition of a brother? On Elinor its effect was very different. She thanked him
with brief, though fervent gratitude, and while he went to hurry off
his servant with a message to Mr. There is always some talent in it. “She expects to be confined in February,” continued Mrs. or had you intended any more serious consequences?”

“My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I
might ever hope to make you love me. The suspicions which had just
arisen of Mr. Such another small basin of thin gruel as his own was all that he
could, with thorough self-approbation, recommend; though he might
constrain himself, while the ladies were comfortably clearing the nicer
things, to say:

“Mrs. At first, she thought it was a good
deal; and afterwards, but little. I wish I were anywhere else.”

Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could, she soon
afterwards took possession of a narrow footpath, a little raised on one
side of the lane, leaving them together in the main road. The particular circumstances between
them made a difficulty of that which to any other person would have
been the easiest thing in the world; but she equally feared to say too
much or too little, and sat deliberating over her paper, with the pen
in her hand, till broken in on by the entrance of Edward himself. Knightley. But it was
too late. But Marianne for some time would give credit to neither. Elton would never marry
indiscreetly; and blushed to think how much truer a knowledge of his
character had been there shewn than any she had reached herself. Smith had somehow or other been
informed, I imagine by some distant relation, whose interest it was to
deprive me of her favour, of an affair, a connection—but I need not
explain myself farther,” he added, looking at her with an heightened
colour and an enquiring eye,—“your particular intimacy—you have
probably heard the whole story long ago.”

“I have,” returned Elinor, colouring likewise, and hardening her heart
anew against any compassion for him, “I have heard it all. But there is one
of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I
dare say very agreeable. What would I give to hear your strictures on them!”

“Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. “It taught me to hope,” said he, “as I had scarcely ever allowed myself
to hope before. These are the kind of little things which please her Ladyship, and
it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to
pay.”

“You judge very properly,” said Mr. He has a wife
and family to maintain, and is not to be giving away his time. She will feel her own sufferings to be nothing. We had better not mention it. As she went upstairs to get ready, Mrs. Elinor drew near, but without
saying a word; and seating herself on the bed, took her hand, kissed
her affectionately several times, and then gave way to a burst of
tears, which at first was scarcely less violent than Marianne’s. You will hardly believe me—but twice
in one week he and Mr. You must learn some of my
philosophy. “Mr. Indeed a man could not very well be in love
with either of her daughters, without extending the passion to her; and
Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon become more like
himself. Elizabeth was pleased; though when
she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply. I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this
discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his
descent, one could not expect much better.”

“His guilt and his descent appear, by your account, to be the same,”
said Elizabeth, angrily; “for I have heard you accuse him of nothing
worse than of being the son of Mr. I have nothing to do with William’s wants, but it
really is of very great importance that _I_ should see Knightley
to-day; and it becomes a matter, therefore, of very serious
inconvenience that I should have had this hot walk to no purpose.”

Emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly. Knightley,
and was now forming all her views of happiness. “I can guess what his business is, however,” said Mrs. But it is even so. She had an opportunity now of speaking her approbation while warm from
her heart, for he stopped to hand her out. So unlike what a man should be!—None of that upright
integrity, that strict adherence to truth and principle, that disdain
of trick and littleness, which a man should display in every
transaction of his life.”

“Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part; for though he has been wrong
in this instance, I have known him long enough to answer for his having
many, very many, good qualities; and—”

“Good God!” cried Emma, not attending to her.—“Mrs. He is in Highbury every now
and then, and he is sure to ride through every week in his way to
Kingston. I am going to London, to spend
a few days with John and Isabella. Poor soul! But I believe I
am nice; I do not like strange voices; and nobody speaks like you and
poor Miss Taylor. When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Robert Ferrars? Willoughby and it was, though from a
different cause, no less unfortunate. He had left the girl whose youth and
innocence he had seduced, in a situation of the utmost distress, with
no creditable home, no help, no friends, ignorant of his address! Lucy went on. He stood by her, however, for
some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady’s whispering
to Elizabeth again, he walked away. I will answer for it _she_ never betrayed the
least thing in the world. Nothing to signify. Elton, I must beg leave to
stop at your house, and ask your housekeeper for a bit of ribband or
string, or any thing just to keep my boot on.”

Mr. A Mrs. He
cannot afford it. “He had been so fortunate as to—I forget
the precise words—one has no business to remember them. Oh, said I, my dear, I did say as much as I could. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for not keeping my
     engagement, and dancing with him to-night. Jennings in the drawing-room to tea. Mrs. Darcy’s
objections; and never had she before been so much disposed to pardon his
interference in the views of his friend. You will not see him. He, her father, a well-meaning,
but not a quick-sighted man, could really, I believe, give no
information; for he had been generally confined to the house, while the
girls were ranging over the town and making what acquaintance they
chose; and he tried to convince me, as thoroughly as he was convinced
himself, of his daughter’s being entirely unconcerned in the business. I saw her as
I came in; she was standing in the entrance. They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made,
seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. I think their father is too rough with
them very often.”

“He appears rough to you,” said Emma, “because you are so very gentle
yourself; but if you could compare him with other papas, you would not
think him rough. She examined into their employments, looked at their work,
and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement
of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she
accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding
out that Mrs. But you will not give me your
advice, Miss Dashwood?”

“No,” answered Elinor, with a smile, which concealed very agitated
feelings, “on such a subject I certainly will not. Emma was not at this time in a state of spirits to care really about
Mr. I have not known you long to be
sure, personally at least, but I have known you and all your family by
description a great while; and as soon as I saw you, I felt almost as
if you was an old acquaintance. And the more sensibility you betray of
their just horrors, the more I shall like you.”

Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour, and they had only
accomplished some views of St. Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile; and succeeded without
difficulty, upon Mrs. Should not the Colonel write
himself?—sure, he is the proper person.”

Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of Mrs. They ought to have balls there at least every
fortnight through the winter. Do not put it into his head. As it is, without any addition of mine, they will each have
about three thousand pounds on their mother’s death—a very comfortable
fortune for any young woman.”

“To be sure it is; and, indeed, it strikes me that they can want no
addition at all. Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings’ party. Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister; for
while he was present Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone else: but
she found herself considerably useful to both of them, in those hours of
separation that must sometimes occur. He would be so very.... “I do not think it will,” stopping to look once
more at all the outward wretchedness of the place, and recall the still
greater within. Smallridge is
intimate with both, and in the very same neighbourhood:—lives only four
miles from Maple Grove. Knightley
marry!—No, I have never had such an idea, and I cannot adopt it now. I have not the smallest doubt of the issue. You will not be sorry to find yourself at home.”

“What is this?—What is this?” cried Mr. yes, very. My mother is delightfully well;
and Jane caught no cold last night. Nothing but real indisposition
could occasion this extraordinary delay. She would not wound the feelings of
her sister on any account, and yet to say what she did not believe was
impossible. “I must have asked Miss Fairfax, and her languid dancing
would not have agreed with me, after yours.”




CHAPTER IX


Emma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles. He came four times
a day for a week. Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy reverie, was yet very glad
to be called from it, by the now encouraging manner of such a judge,
and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse, and only wanted invitation, to
give the history of her hopes with great, though trembling
delight.—Emma’s tremblings as she asked, and as she listened, were
better concealed than Harriet’s, but they were not less. “You dislike an argument,
and want to silence this.”

“Perhaps I do. I hope he will come tonight. They met with the utmost
friendliness. But the fact is, that we are very
different sort of men, and that he hates me.”

“This is quite shocking! This would be a trial. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. His
attachment to them all increased. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. He was declared to be in debt
to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with
the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman’s family. But the correctness of his eye, and the delicacy of
his taste, proved to be beyond his politeness. Long before it had taken place, my opinion of you was
decided. Jane had already written a few lines to her sister, to announce their
safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it
would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable
addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged
officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a
forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the
daughter. He did really look and speak as if
in a state of no common enjoyment. Her thoughts were silently fixed on the
irreparable injury which too early an independence and its consequent
habits of idleness, dissipation, and luxury, had made in the mind, the
character, the happiness, of a man who, to every advantage of person
and talents, united a disposition naturally open and honest, and a
feeling, affectionate temper. She
had raised herself from the ground, but her foot had been twisted in
her fall, and she was scarcely able to stand. You can borrow Mrs. He thought it very well done of Mr. Somebody had placed
her, several years back, at Mrs. He wishes exceedingly to come;
but his uncle and aunt will not spare him.”

“I cannot believe that he has not the power of coming, if he made a
point of it. but I never have been
in love; it is not my way, or my nature; and I do not think I ever
shall. Woodhouse opposed it earnestly, on the score
of health. All was joy and
kindness. And with regard to the
resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former
_were_ excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one moment’s
concern--and the world in general would have too much sense to join in
the scorn.”

“And this is your real opinion! And I am sure I
should not have the smallest fear of trusting _you;_ indeed, I should
be very glad of your advice how to manage in such an uncomfortable
situation as I am; but, however, there is no occasion to trouble _you_. Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any
extenuating circumstances in the case unknown to the society of
Hertfordshire: her mild and steady candour always pleaded for
allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes; but by everybody else
Mr. To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their
hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of
their dear friend’s vulgar relations. The
simplicity and cheerfulness of her nature, her contented and grateful
spirit, were a recommendation to every body, and a mine of felicity to
herself. “How odd, indeed!” repeated Elinor within herself, regarding her sister
with uneasiness. Knightley; and
by Mr. Elton; “it would indeed be a delight! It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an
indirect boast.”

“And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?”

“The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in
writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of
thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you
think at least highly interesting. I had imagined him, I confess, a
degree or two nearer gentility.”

“To be sure,” said Harriet, in a mortified voice, “he is not so genteel
as real gentlemen.”

“I think, Harriet, since your acquaintance with us, you have been
repeatedly in the company of some such very real gentlemen, that you
must yourself be struck with the difference in Mr. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. Mrs. How
anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one’s own
daughters I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. A present of fifty
pounds, now and then, will prevent their ever being distressed for
money, and will, I think, be amply discharging my promise to my
father.”

“To be sure it will. As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing-room of the park the next
day, at one door, Mrs. “Think of me to-morrow, my dear Emma, about four o’clock,” was Mrs. But Marianne, who saw his agitation, and could easily trace it
to whatever cause best pleased herself, was perfectly satisfied, and
soon talked of something else. My acquaintance with him has
been but trifling.—And even if I have not underrated him hitherto, he
may yet turn out well.—With such a woman he has a chance.—I have no
motive for wishing him ill—and for her sake, whose happiness will be
involved in his good character and conduct, I shall certainly wish him
well.”

“I have no doubt of their being happy together,” said Emma; “I believe
them to be very mutually and very sincerely attached.”

“He is a most fortunate man!” returned Mr. I never heard of her existence till the day before
yesterday.”

“Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is
believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates.”

This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss
Bingley. I must feel—I must be wretched—and they are
welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it that can.”

“But for my mother’s sake and mine—”

“I would do more than for my own. “But the wife of Mr. Jane should
therefore make the most of every half hour in which she can command his
attention. Elinor could not be cheerful. No; he was talking to
Mrs. Poor Edward! Jennings and Elinor readily consented, as having likewise
some purchases to make themselves; and Marianne, though declining it at
first was induced to go likewise. By
only raising my voice, and saying any thing two or three times over,
she is sure to hear; but then she is used to my voice. Collins was first introduced to her
notice, but he certainly has not known her long.”

“You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy
were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of
character and ideas between us. “I wrote to him, my love, last week, and rather expect to see, than to
hear from him again. To restrain him as much as might be, by her own manners, she was
immediately preparing to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity of
the weather and the night; but scarcely had she begun, scarcely had
they passed the sweep-gate and joined the other carriage, than she
found her subject cut up—her hand seized—her attention demanded, and
Mr. “Can you, ma’am?” said almost every body. “Oh, Elinor!” she cried, “I have such a secret to tell you about
Marianne. An airing in the Hartfield carriage would have been the rack,
and arrowroot from the Hartfield storeroom must have been poison. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. She would have
given the world to be able to speak—and to make them understand that
she hoped no coolness, no slight, would appear in their behaviour to
him;—but she had no utterance, and was obliged to leave all to their
own discretion. and
Mrs. Churchill will not be second to any lady in the
land for”—

Mrs. And there is something of dignity in his countenance, that would
not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of
passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too
much engrossed by his own thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas
was his neighbour, till Sir William thus began:--

“What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. How did you think the Coxes looked?”

“Just as they always do—very vulgar.”

“They told me something,” said Harriet rather hesitatingly; “but it is
nothing of any consequence.”

Emma was obliged to ask what they had told her, though fearful of its
producing Mr. Elinor had always thought it would be more prudent for them to settle
at some distance from Norland, than immediately amongst their present
acquaintance. “Such things do occur, undoubtedly.”—She was stopped by a cough. No,
no; I feel he may defy us there. Presently Mr. Collins have a comfortable income, but not
such a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my
friend would not call herself _near_ her family under less than _half_
the present distance.”

Mr. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the
principal object. Palmer’s departure, and her
situation continued, with little variation, the same. He argued like a
young man very much bent on dancing; and Emma was rather surprized to
see the constitution of the Weston prevail so decidedly against the
habits of the Churchills. [Illustration]

The first week of their return was soon gone. You may
guess how readily he came into my wishes; and having his approbation, I
made my way directly to Miss Bates, to assure her that the carriage
would be at her service before it took us home; for I thought it would
be making her comfortable at once. Dashwood and Mrs. What is passable in youth is detestable in later
age. Jennings, but even Lucy, when
they parted, gave her a pressing invitation to visit her there. In a very few weeks from the day which brought Sir John Middleton’s
first letter to Norland, every thing was so far settled in their future
abode as to enable Mrs. Another slice
of cold meat, another draught of Madeira and water, will make you
nearly on a par with the rest of us.”

“No—I shall not stir. Dashwood remained at Norland several months; not from any
disinclination to move when the sight of every well known spot ceased
to raise the violent emotion which it produced for a while; for when
her spirits began to revive, and her mind became capable of some other
exertion than that of heightening its affliction by melancholy
remembrances, she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in her
inquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland; for
to remove far from that beloved spot was impossible. Vigorous, decided, with sentiments to a
certain point, not coarse. Jennings’s going away, remained fixed at the table
where Elinor wrote, watching the advancement of her pen, grieving over
her for the hardship of such a task, and grieving still more fondly
over its effect on her mother. He deserves to be publicly disgraced.”

“Some time or other he _will_ be--but it shall not be by _me_. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led
voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for
the world. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear
of seeing Mr. Never since reading Jane’s second letter had she entertained a
hope of Wickham’s meaning to marry her. He
walked off in more complete self-approbation than he left for her. But I want to set your
heart at ease as to Mrs. But he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition to
answer the wishes of his mother and sister, who longed to see him
distinguished—as—they hardly knew what. “Don’t keep coughing so, Kitty, for heaven’s sake! And I should never have expected you to be lending your sanction to
such vanity-baits for poor young ladies.”

“My dear, you do not understand me. “Might he not?—Is
not it possible, that when enquiring, as you thought, into the state of
your affections, he might be alluding to Mr. But I have done with expecting any course of
steady reading from Emma. Wherever you and Jane are known,
you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less
advantage for having a couple of--or I may say, three--very silly
sisters. I had a vast deal more to say to
you, but I must not stay away from them not any longer. If Mr. She was delighted to see her father look
comfortable, and very much pleased with herself for contriving things
so well; but the quiet prosings of three such women made her feel that
every evening so spent was indeed one of the long evenings she had
fearfully anticipated. Mr. [Illustration: “On looking up”]




CHAPTER XXXIII. Mr. In a moment he went on—

“That will never be, however, I can assure you. Mr. It was not known that Wickham had a single relation with whom he kept up
any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living. Jennings, who had watched them with pleasure
while they were talking, and who expected to see the effect of Miss
Dashwood’s communication, in such an instantaneous gaiety on Colonel
Brandon’s side, as might have become a man in the bloom of youth, of
hope and happiness, saw him, with amazement, remain the whole evening
more serious and thoughtful than usual. Does it not expressly
declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister;
that she is perfectly convinced of her brother’s indifference; and that
if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him she means (most
kindly!) to put me on my guard. It seemed to him a very
ill-judged measure.”

Emma’s attempts to stop her father had been vain; and when he had
reached such a point as this, she could not wonder at her
brother-in-law’s breaking out. How angry and how diverted he
would be! And, upon my word, I do not think Mr. But as I have always had a thoroughly good opinion of Miss
Fairfax, I never could, under any blunder, have spoken ill of her; and
as to speaking ill of him, there I must have been safe.”

At this moment Mr. You must not suspect me. Jennings are to be the proof of
impropriety in conduct, we are all offending every moment of our lives. He had, to be sure, done much. Absence might have weakened his regard, and
convenience might have determined him to overcome it, but that such a
regard had formerly existed she could not bring herself to doubt. Mr. Mrs. I had a letter from him this morning, and he will be with us
within a fortnight.”

Emma spoke with a very proper degree of pleasure; and fully assented to
his proposition of Mr. Darcy, you must allow
me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. But slyness seems the fashion. When the tea things were removed, and the card tables placed, the ladies
all rose; and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when
all her views were overthrown, by seeing him fall a victim to her
mother’s rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated
with the rest of the party. Marianne, to the surprise of her sister, determined on dining with
them. William Cox.’
My dear sir, you are too obliging.—Is there nobody you would not
rather?—I am not helpless. I have something of consequence to inform you of, which I was on
the point of communicating by paper. Bennet and her daughters apologized most civilly for Lydia’s
interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would
resume his book; but Mr. Collins came up to them,
and told her with great exultation, that he had just been so fortunate
as to make a most important discovery. Ah! Why Mr. Knightley does not want to marry. my dear, it is not like Hartfield. Could she be secure of that, indeed, of his never marrying at
all, she believed she should be perfectly satisfied.—Let him but
continue the same Mr. no; I was pleased with my own perseverance in asking questions;
and amused to think how little information I obtained.”

“I am disappointed,” was his only answer. Not like the wild young men now-a-days, who think of nothing but
themselves. You will have no business
here.—Let it stay, however,’ said she; ‘give it houseroom till Colonel
Campbell comes back. She had been unwilling to
mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made
her equally avoid the name of his friend: but now she would no longer
conceal from her his share in Lydia’s marriage. Bennet, by talking in this way? “It is not that such a circumstance would now make me unhappy, but I
cannot believe it. Matrimony, as the origin of change, was always disagreeable; and he was
by no means yet reconciled to his own daughter’s marrying, nor could
ever speak of her but with compassion, though it had been entirely a
match of affection, when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor
too; and from his habits of gentle selfishness, and of being never able
to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself, he
was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for
herself as for them, and would have been a great deal happier if she
had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield. He must do it all himself. They quitted it only with the
removal of the tea-things. Harriet would be loved as one to whom she could be useful. And I assure you I never was better pleased in my life, and I
wish you joy of it with all my heart.”

“Thank you, ma’am,” said Elinor. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on
together. Woodhouse or Mr. Miss Campbell always was
absolutely plain—but extremely elegant and amiable.”

“Yes, that of course.”

“Jane caught a bad cold, poor thing! Is it
impossible to—? John Knightley looked as if he did not comprehend the pleasure, but
said only, coolly,

“I cannot wish to be snowed up a week at Randalls.”

At another time Emma might have been amused, but she was too much
astonished now at Mr. Elton?” said she;
“that is the only security for its freshness; and nothing could be
easier to you.”

“Oh no! Her husband was a grave looking young man of five or six and
twenty, with an air of more fashion and sense than his wife, but of
less willingness to please or be pleased. Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage
before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. The real
state of things between Willoughby and her sister was so little known
to herself, that in endeavouring to explain it, she might be as liable
to say too much as too little. Weston, that it had not added any lasting warmth, that she
could still do without the writer, and that he must learn to do without
her. I don’t know. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am; and nothing
     but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed
     him to act as he has done. I will bring friends with me.”

“I hope you will bring Elton,” said he: “but I will not trouble you to
give any other invitations.”

“Oh! Your reasonings
carry my judgment along with them entirely. Now there is no one to regard them. Willoughby
will do between you about her. He had some intention, he added, of studying the law, and I
must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very
insufficient support therein. Knightley.”

“Perhaps you think I am come on purpose to quarrel with you, knowing
Weston to be out, and that you must still fight your own battle.”

“Mr. But I will not torment
you with vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks. The party did not break up without Emma’s being positively
secured for the two first dances by the hero of the evening, nor
without her overhearing Mr. However small Elinor’s general dependence on Lucy’s veracity might be,
it was impossible for her on serious reflection to suspect it in the
present case, where no temptation could be answerable to the folly of
inventing a falsehood of such a description. Of Elinor’s distress, she was too busily employed in
measuring lengths of worsted for her rug, to see any thing at all; and
calmly continuing her talk, as soon as Marianne disappeared, she said,

“Upon my word, I never saw a young woman so desperately in love in my
life! Scarcely a word was
spoken during their return to Berkeley Street. We know
how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself? Your profusion makes me
saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will be as
light as a feather.”

“Poor Wickham! “His name is Ferrars,” said he, in a very audible whisper; “but pray do
not tell it, for it’s a great secret.”

“Ferrars!” repeated Miss Steele; “Mr. Dashwood, to her daughters’ continuance at
Norland. She could consult with her brother, could receive
her sister-in-law on her arrival, and treat her with proper attention;
and could strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion, and encourage
her to similar forbearance. It would never do. Dashwood with more than
politeness; with a kindness which Sir John’s account of him and her own
gratitude prompted; and every thing that passed during the visit tended
to assure him of the sense, elegance, mutual affection, and domestic
comfort of the family to whom accident had now introduced him. But, Mr. It was told me,—it
was in a manner forced on me by the very person herself, whose prior
engagement ruined all my prospects; and told me, as I thought, with
triumph. “I see your design, Bingley,” said his friend. “Ah! Bennet’s visit, and determining when they should ask him to
dinner. Knightley and some from her own heart,
as to her deficiency—but none were equal to counteract the persuasion
of its being very disagreeable,—a waste of time—tiresome women—and all
the horror of being in danger of falling in with the second-rate and
third-rate of Highbury, who were calling on them for ever, and
therefore she seldom went near them. “Well! You saw it all; and was not you quite struck
with it?”

“She was certainly very civil to you.”

“Civil!—Did you see nothing but only civility?—I saw a vast deal more. I know no harm of her.”

“But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather’s death
made her mistress of this fortune?”

“No--why should he? Amazed at the
alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he
uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the
impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few
minutes in which they continued together were some of the most
uncomfortable of her life. Elton in
vain—by the surrender of all the dangerous pleasure of knowing herself
beloved by the husband of her friend. Such a disappointment! Weston, “as can well be; and while
she is so happy at Hartfield, I cannot wish her to be forming any
attachment which would be creating such difficulties on poor Mr. This is
what I believe to have happened. Collins
was settled _near_ her family.”

“It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Elton should really be in love with me,—me, of all people,
who did not know him, to speak to him, at Michaelmas! Weston giving an account
of a little alarm she had been under, the evening before, from the
infant’s appearing not quite well. He survived his uncle no longer; and ten
thousand pounds, including the late legacies, was all that remained for
his widow and daughters. I do not
advise you to give way to it, Harriet. She told the story,
however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,
playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous. This is a point which you must settle with your feelings.”

“I had no notion that he liked me so very much,” said Harriet,
contemplating the letter. Be infinitely cleverer and not half so conceited. What, all five out at once? You are very kind to bring me these interesting
particulars. Palmer is so droll!” said she, in a whisper, to Elinor. They are both delightful women,
indeed!—I wonder I should never hear you say how agreeable Mrs. In the absence of Jane, he always
attached himself to Elizabeth for the pleasure of talking of her; and
when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of relief. Soon afterwards he began again,

“How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on
this occasion, Miss Fairfax. Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may be
half as delightful as Pemberley.”

“I wish it may.”

“But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that
neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There had been a time also when Emma would have been
sorry to see Harriet in a spot so favourable for the Abbey Mill Farm;
but now she feared it not. She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to
each to be dwelt on farther. such delightful proofs of
Hartfield’s attraction, as those sort of visits conveyed, might shortly
be over. We both know that he has been profligate in every
sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is
as false and deceitful as he is insinuating.”

“And do you really know all this?” cried Mrs. “He had never seen so
lovely a face, and was delighted with her naïveté.” And she, “Only to
be sure it was paying him too great a compliment, but she did think
there were some looks a little like Mr. And as for James, you may be very sure he will always like going
to Randalls, because of his daughter’s being housemaid there. Their manners were particularly civil, and Elinor soon
allowed them credit for some kind of sense, when she saw with what
constant and judicious attention they were making themselves agreeable
to Lady Middleton. “These are done by my eldest sister,” said he; “and you, as a man of
taste, will, I dare say, be pleased with them. Elton in love with me!—What an idea!”

“I do not say it is so; but you will do well to consider whether it is
so or not, and to regulate your behaviour accordingly. Nothing has proved him
unworthy; nor has anything declared him indifferent to me. The tea
things were brought in, and already had Marianne been disappointed more
than once by a rap at a neighbouring door, when a loud one was suddenly
heard which could not be mistaken for one at any other house, Elinor
felt secure of its announcing Willoughby’s approach, and Marianne,
starting up, moved towards the door. “I have burnt all your letters, and will return your picture the first
opportunity. His first object with her, he acknowledged, had been to persuade
     her to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her
     friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her,
     offering his assistance as far as it would go. But first of all, there must be an answer
written to Mrs. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they now felt
that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such
a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. But I dare say you will go for all that. He is
fastidious and will have an affectation of his own.”

“It is very true,” said Marianne, “that admiration of landscape scenery
is become a mere jargon. Perhaps it is paid already. We really seem quite
the fashion. I have never seen
either Mr. I was late; I met her walking home by herself, and
wanted to walk with her, but she would not suffer it. Conversation however was not wanted, for Sir John was very chatty, and
Lady Middleton had taken the wise precaution of bringing with her their
eldest child, a fine little boy about six years old, by which means
there was one subject always to be recurred to by the ladies in case of
extremity, for they had to enquire his name and age, admire his beauty,
and ask him questions which his mother answered for him, while he hung
about her and held down his head, to the great surprise of her
ladyship, who wondered at his being so shy before company, as he could
make noise enough at home. Palmer if there was any news in
the paper. She longed for
the serenity they might gradually introduce; and on Mr. She might never have thought of him but for
me; and certainly never would have thought of him with hope, if I had
not assured her of his attachment, for she is as modest and humble as I
used to think him. “My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the spring, or
summer at farthest,” continued Mrs. “_I_ am writing home, Marianne,” said Elinor; “had not you
better defer your letter for a day or two?”

“I am _not_ going to write to my mother,” replied Marianne, hastily,
and as if wishing to avoid any farther inquiry. Jennings and Elinor
were of the number; but Marianne, who knew that the Willoughbys were
again in town, and had a constant dread of meeting them, chose rather
to stay at home, than venture into so public a place. He was not calm; his spirits were
evidently fluttered; there was restlessness about him. Goddard in a moment, if you wish it.”

But the idea of any thing to be done in a _moment_, was increasing, not
lessening, Mr. “My father would say
‘yes,’ Mr. He had never been in the room at the
Crown in his life—did not know the people who kept it by sight.—Oh! No
aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after; the very shoe-roses
for Netherfield were got by proxy. Don’t we all
know that it must be a match, that they were over head and ears in love
with each other from the first moment they met? I want to be told whether I
ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintance in general understand
Wickham’s character.”

Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, “Surely there can be no
occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. If he were, every thing else must give
way; but otherwise his friend Cole had been saying so much about his
dining with him—had made such a point of it, that he had promised him
conditionally to come. such an aunt!” said Emma, as she turned back into
the hall again. Miss Woodhouse, what a pity that I must not write this beautiful
charade into my book! “Nay, how could I help saying what I did?—Nobody could have helped it. The impertinence of these kind of scrutinies, moreover, was generally
concluded with a compliment, which though meant as its douceur, was
considered by Marianne as the greatest impertinence of all; for after
undergoing an examination into the value and make of her gown, the
colour of her shoes, and the arrangement of her hair, she was almost
sure of being told that upon “her word she looked vastly smart, and she
dared to say she would make a great many conquests.”

With such encouragement as this, was she dismissed on the present
occasion, to her brother’s carriage; which they were ready to enter
five minutes after it stopped at the door, a punctuality not very
agreeable to their sister-in-law, who had preceded them to the house of
her acquaintance, and was there hoping for some delay on their part
that might inconvenience either herself or her coachman. Not that she
_wanted_ him to marry. Collins’s picture of Hunsford and
Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait
for her own visit there, to know the rest. Well, and how did Mr. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and
though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much
kinder answer than she knew was deserved. I never
in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses. Besides in the present case, I really
thought some explanation was due to you after my making such particular
inquiries about Edward’s mother; and I am so unfortunate, that I have
not a creature whose advice I can ask. He lived to exert, and frequently to
enjoy himself. ‘Lord!’ thinks she to herself, ‘they are all
so fond of Lucy, to be sure they will make no difficulty about it;’ and
so, away she went to your sister, who was sitting all alone at her
carpet-work, little suspecting what was to come—for she had just been
saying to your brother, only five minutes before, that she thought to
make a match between Edward and some Lord’s daughter or other, I forget
who. It has been involuntary, and I will not
encourage it. I have faults enough,
but they are not, I hope, of understanding. For a few moments, indeed,
she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. Knightley dryly, “writes to a fair lady like Miss Woodhouse, he will,
of course, put forth his best.”

Dinner was on table.—Mrs. yes—did not you know?—Well, well, never mind.”

For a moment he was silent; and then added, in a tone much more guarded
and demure,

“Yes, Frank came over this morning, just to ask us how we did.”

They hurried on, and were speedily at Randalls.—“Well, my dear,” said
he, as they entered the room—“I have brought her, and now I hope you
will soon be better. She felt that she should like to have had the power of
refusal; and afterwards, as the idea of the party to be assembled
there, consisting precisely of those whose society was dearest to her,
occurred again and again, she did not know that she might not have been
tempted to accept. To him therefore the succession to the Norland estate was not
so really important as to his sisters; for their fortune, independent
of what might arise to them from their father’s inheriting that
property, could be but small. A variety of occupations, of objects, and of
company, which could not be procured at Barton, would be inevitable
there, and might yet, she hoped, cheat Marianne, at times, into some
interest beyond herself, and even into some amusement, much as the
ideas of both might now be spurned by her. And now nothing
remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the
violence of my affection. “But where could _you_ hear it?” cried Miss Bates. Darcy had at first scarcely
allowed her to be pretty: he had looked at her without admiration at the
ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. Bennet’s
heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his
own future property. Former provocations reappeared. Martin the very next day, as they were walking on the
Donwell road. Is it necessary for me to use any roundabout
phrase?—Your Yorkshire friend—your correspondent in Yorkshire;—that
would be the way, I suppose, if I were very bad.—No, I can pronounce
his name without the smallest distress. Jennings was delighted with her gratitude, and only wondered that
after hearing such a sentence, the Colonel should be able to take leave
of them, as he immediately did, with the utmost _sang-froid_, and go
away without making her any reply! Jennings, Mrs. They vindicated him against
the base aspersion. Cole. Collins having
been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was
able to bring home the pleasing intelligence of their appearing in very
good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the
melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. Knightley is the
last man in the world, who would intentionally give any woman the idea
of his feeling for her more than he really does.”

Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so
satisfactory; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness, which
at that moment would have been dreadful penance, by the sound of her
father’s footsteps. It was on the wedding-day of this
beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any
continuance. Anne would have
been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.”

Elizabeth looked at Darcy, to see how cordially he assented to his
cousin’s praise: but neither at that moment nor at any other could she
discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss
De Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have
been just as likely to marry _her_, had she been his relation. There is no danger of Wickham’s marrying Mary King--there’s for you! Your mother
should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.”

“My mother would have no objection, but my father hates London.”

“Has your governess left you?”

“We never had any governess.”

“No governess! Who is to fight Wickham,
and make him marry her, if he comes away?”

As Mrs. Churchill made me think of them
directly. By this time, the walk in the rain had reached Mrs. I declare, I have no patience with your sister; and I hope,
with all my heart, it will be a match in spite of her. They had stopped at Mrs. She must have delighted
the Coles—worthy people, who deserved to be made happy!—And left a name
behind her that would not soon die away. With all the eagerness which such a transition gives,
Emma resolved to be out of doors as soon as possible. What other reason for the disclosure of the
affair could there be, but that Elinor might be informed by it of
Lucy’s superior claims on Edward, and be taught to avoid him in future? Four sides of paper were
insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of
being loved by her sister. Some
inconvenience to your friends, indeed, might result from it—you would
not be able to give them so much of your time. He
thus continued:—

“Mrs. Mr. If a separation of two
months should not have cooled him, there were dangers and evils before
her:—caution for him and for herself would be necessary. I thought him very sly; he hardly ever
     mentioned your name. But,”
she continued, recollecting herself, “as we know none of the
particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. The answer was
only in this short note:

“Miss Fairfax’s compliments and thanks, but is quite unequal to any
exercise.”

Emma felt that her own note had deserved something better; but it was
impossible to quarrel with words, whose tremulous inequality shewed
indisposition so plainly, and she thought only of how she might best
counteract this unwillingness to be seen or assisted. They were rather handsome; had been educated in one of the first private
seminaries in town; had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds; were in the
habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people
of rank; and were, therefore, in every respect entitled to think well of
themselves and meanly of others. “Not at all. no, upon my word I have not the
smallest wish for your marrying Jane Fairfax or Jane any body. The promised
letter of thanks from Mr. Collins
had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be happy
together; and, fourthly, that the match might be broken off. His countenance, voice, and
manner, had established him at once in the possession of every virtue. These
difficulties, indeed, with a heart so alienated from Lucy, might not
press very hard upon his patience; but melancholy was the state of the
person by whom the expectation of family opposition and unkindness,
could be felt as a relief! His
friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in
ten days’ time. “I
never heard any county but Surry called so.”

Emma was silenced. VOLUME II




CHAPTER I


Emma and Harriet had been walking together one morning, and, in Emma’s
opinion, had been talking enough of Mr. They gaily ascended the downs, rejoicing in their own penetration at
every glimpse of blue sky; and when they caught in their faces the
animating gales of a high south-westerly wind, they pitied the fears
which had prevented their mother and Elinor from sharing such
delightful sensations. John
Knightley; consequently to Isabella. It was not lost on me. Every body is lazy! I saw her placed in
comfortable lodgings, and under proper attendants; I visited her every
day during the rest of her short life: I was with her in her last
moments.”

Again he stopped to recover himself; and Elinor spoke her feelings in
an exclamation of tender concern, at the fate of his unfortunate
friend. Woodhouse, so as to make such an
arrangement desirable!—The difficulty of disposing of poor Mr. John Knightley did not by any means like; he anticipated
nothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchase; and the
whole of their drive to the vicarage was spent by him in expressing his
discontent. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. They are not at all the less written you know,
because you divide them. Bingley?”

“Not at all.”

“He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. Wickham’s attentions. He sat down for a few moments, and
then getting up walked about the room. One evening in particular, about a week after Colonel Brandon left the
country, his heart seemed more than usually open to every feeling of
attachment to the objects around him; and on Mrs. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. “And there will be the
two Gilberts, young Cox, my father, and myself, besides Mr. Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;
and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Weston, “ever since
September: every letter has been full of it; but he cannot command his
own time. I am so
pleased--so happy. She had many
acquaintance in the place, for her father was universally civil, but
not one among them who could be accepted in lieu of Miss Taylor for
even half a day. Nothing could
console and nothing appease her. Henry is the
eldest, he was named after me, not after his father. The
rector of a parish has much to do. I am sure of your kind support and aid.”

Emma saw Mrs. To be sure you know no actual good of me--but nobody thinks
of _that_ when they fall in love.”

“Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane, while she was
ill at Netherfield?”

“Dearest Jane! Ferrars does not know what she may be
doing—what she may drive her son to. Jennings was perfectly true. It must have been from attachment only, that she could be led
to form the engagement. Harriet was too
much agitated to encounter him. I am very much afraid that it will all end in nothing. He was coming through the hall. It would
have been such a great pity to have went away before your brother and
sister came. Mrs. Something
really important seemed announced by his looks; but, as her friend was
well, she endeavoured not to be uneasy, and settling it with her
father, that she would take her walk now, she and Mr. Nobody wants him to come; though I
shall always say that he used my daughter extremely ill; and, if I was
her, I would not have put up with it. admits our apology, and is
not offended. The village of Barton was
chiefly on one of these hills, and formed a pleasant view from the
cottage windows. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in
such confusion!”

“Oh, Jane,” cried Elizabeth, “was there a servant belonging to it who
did not know the whole story before the end of the day?”

“I do not know: I hope there was. But in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy,
and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy. Dashwood, urged equally by her own and her
daughter’s wishes, began to talk of removing to Barton. But you were preparing yourself
to be an excellent wife all the time you were at Hartfield. We have apple-dumplings, however, very often. I _will_ leave him to himself.”

In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her
feelings, in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily
perceive that her spirits were affected by it. Her mind was so much weakened that she
still fancied present exertion impossible, and therefore it only
dispirited her more. Weston kindly and persuasively, “I certainly do
feel tempted to give. The time was now drawing on, when Colonel Brandon might be expected
back. But I had just settled within myself to ask the Miss Steeles to spend a
few days with us. “Had I known as much half an hour ago;—but since I _am_ here,” speaking
with a forced vivacity as he returned to his seat,—“what does it
signify? She could then see
more and judge better. She had no fear of its spreading farther, through his means. Have a little
compassion on my nerves. The rest of the evening passed with the _appearance_, on his side,
of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish
Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a
mutual desire of never meeting again. Do your sisters play and sing?”

“One of them does.”

“Why did not you all learn? Dashwood, “I believe you are perfectly right. It was not forced on you. Knightley’s most improved opinion of
Harriet. He will be a completely gross,
vulgar farmer, totally inattentive to appearances, and thinking of
nothing but profit and loss.”

“Will he, indeed? Knightley and Harriet had arrived during her absence, and were sitting
with her father.—Mr. Elton’s nonsense, which she particularly wished to listen to. She soon
caught his eye, and he immediately bowed, but without attempting to
speak to her, or to approach Marianne, though he could not but see her;
and then continued his discourse with the same lady. But you shall hear it all. John Knightley were not detained long at Hartfield. James could take the note. Mrs. “Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man, that he rather wished any one to
announce his intentions to Mr. Weston
ended with, “We have not yet had the letter we are so anxious for, you
know, but I hope it will soon come,” she was obliged to pause before
she answered, and at last obliged to answer at random, before she could
at all recollect what letter it was which they were so anxious for. I have thought only of
you. I have no pity for either of them. Lady Catherine then
observed,--

“Your father’s estate is entailed on Mr. Whenever she is with us, Mrs. Jane often
says, when she is here, ‘I am sure, grandmama, you must have had very
strong eyes to see as you do—and so much fine work as you have done
too!—I only wish my eyes may last me as well.’”

All this spoken extremely fast obliged Miss Bates to stop for breath;
and Emma said something very civil about the excellence of Miss
Fairfax’s handwriting. I know you are attached to them.”

“You certainly will meet them if I can prevail; and I shall call on
Miss Bates in my way home.”

“That’s quite unnecessary; I see Jane every day:—but as you like. The contrivances of modern days indeed have
rendered a gentleman’s carriage perfectly complete. Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand
questions; and I find that the young man forgot to tell you, among his
other communications, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late Mr. Miss Woodhouse, the comfort of
being sometimes alone!”—seemed to burst from an overcharged heart, and
to describe somewhat of the continual endurance to be practised by her,
even towards some of those who loved her best. He was soon pretty well
resigned. “Oh, my dear Miss Dashwood,” said Mrs. Gardiner’s letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards
him. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he
sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that, as soon
as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Darcy, she moved again
towards the gate. John Knightley is easily alarmed, and might be made unhappy about
her sister.”

“Be satisfied,” said he, “I will not raise any outcry. At last Jane began, and though the first bars were feebly given, the
powers of the instrument were gradually done full justice to. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way? They would be estimated very
differently by others as well as myself; Mr. Mr. One would fancy we were bosom friends! Don’t pretend to be in
raptures about mine. I am tired of doing nothing. To some few of the company it appeared rather a bold undertaking,
considering the time of year, and that it had rained every day for the
last fortnight;—and Mrs. His manners are certainly
not the happiest in nature. She speedily
comprehended all his merits; the persuasion of his regard for Elinor
perhaps assisted her penetration; but she really felt assured of his
worth: and even that quietness of manner, which militated against all
her established ideas of what a young man’s address ought to be, was no
longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his temper
affectionate. united, (_courtship_, you know,) what reverse we have! Her gestures and movements might be
understood by any one who looked on like Emma; but her words, every
body’s words, were soon lost under the incessant flow of Miss Bates,
who came in talking, and had not finished her speech under many minutes
after her being admitted into the circle at the fire. _Miss_ _Woodhouse_ appeared more
than once, and never without a something of pleasing connexion, either
a compliment to her taste, or a remembrance of what she had said; and
in the very last time of its meeting her eye, unadorned as it was by
any such broad wreath of gallantry, she yet could discern the effect of
her influence and acknowledge the greatest compliment perhaps of all
conveyed. She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in
disposition and talents, would most suit her. Well, and so this was
kept a great secret, for fear of Mrs. Woodhouse agreed to it all, but added,

“Our little friend Harriet Smith, however, is just such another pretty
kind of young person. Weston, if there
were an account drawn up of the evil and the good I have done Miss
Fairfax!—Well (checking herself, and trying to be more lively), this is
all to be forgotten. “But, Mr. Little Henry
was in her thoughts, and a mixture of alarm and delicacy made her
irresolute what else to say. Let me entreat you to run no risks. He was very fond of them.”

This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. He will
be able to tell her how we all are.”

Emma spared no exertions to maintain this happier flow of ideas, and
hoped, by the help of backgammon, to get her father tolerably through
the evening, and be attacked by no regrets but her own. Oh, no, no--this is not likely. But make a virtue of it
by all means. What else can detain him at
Norland?”

“Had you any idea of his coming so soon?” said Mrs. “He
only told me what I have now told you.”

Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with
indignation. Margaret, the other sister, was a good-humored, well-disposed girl; but
as she had already imbibed a good deal of Marianne’s romance, without
having much of her sense, she did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equal
her sisters at a more advanced period of life. I have heard him speak, and so must you, so very highly of
Jane Fairfax! _You_ know him too
well to doubt the rest. Woodhouse, not thinking the asparagus quite boiled enough, sent it all
out again. In this situation, Elinor,
roused from sleep by her agitation and sobs, first perceived her; and
after observing her for a few moments with silent anxiety, said, in a
tone of the most considerate gentleness,

“Marianne, may I ask—?”

“No, Elinor,” she replied, “ask nothing; you will soon know all.”

The sort of desperate calmness with which this was said, lasted no
longer than while she spoke, and was immediately followed by a return
of the same excessive affliction. “And _that_, I suppose, is one of your sisters?”

“Yes, madam,” said Mrs. Elton could not have suffered long; but
she was sorry for Harriet: Harriet must feel it—and all that she could
hope was, by giving the first information herself, to save her from
hearing it abruptly from others. Mr. Yet, in spite of all these temptations, let me warn
my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a
precipitate closure with this gentleman’s proposals, which, of course,
you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of.’ Have you any idea,
Lizzy, who this gentleman is? He drove through the park very fast,
and they were soon out of sight; and nothing more of them was seen till
their return, which did not happen till after the return of all the
rest. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what
passed, took leave and rode on with his friend. It
was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as
Jane’s marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men;
and, lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to
consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that she might
not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. As this silence continued, every day made it appear more strange
and more incompatible with the disposition of both. This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father’s
estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and
suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own
part. Emma saw him only once; but two or three times
every day Harriet was sure _just_ to meet with him, or _just_ to miss
him, _just_ to hear his voice, or see his shoulder, _just_ to have
something occur to preserve him in her fancy, in all the favouring
warmth of surprize and conjecture. However, when I read on, I found it was not near so bad as I had
fancied at first; and I make so light of it now to her, that she does
not think much about it. Pray come in; do come in. Mr. But so
little were they, any more than the others, inclined to oblige her,
that if Sir John dined from home, she might spend a whole day without
hearing any other raillery on the subject, than what she was kind
enough to bestow on herself. Some scruples and some
reluctance the widower-father may be supposed to have felt; but as they
were overcome by other considerations, the child was given up to the
care and the wealth of the Churchills, and he had only his own comfort
to seek, and his own situation to improve as he could. What I am now doing indeed, seems nothing at all, since it
can advance him so little towards what must be his principal, his only
object of happiness. He was so much displeased, that it was longer than usual
before he came to Hartfield again; and when they did meet, his grave
looks shewed that she was not forgiven. Oh! Wickham for the last time. The strength, resolution, and presence of mind of
the Mr. I always deserve the best treatment, because I never put up with
any other; and, therefore, you must give me a plain, direct answer. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures,
“is my master--and very like him. Gardiner, “that no consideration with regard to
this young man will influence her. And so, I suppose, they often
talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. When that was once done, however, it was time for
the raptures of Edward to cease; for Marianne’s joy hurried her into
the drawing-room immediately. Whenever Charlotte came to see
them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and
whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Jane says that Colonel Campbell is a little deaf. Have you not heard me say, that from his
earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?”

“Yes; and I had heard it before. Granted;—for private enjoyment; and for private
enjoyment keep them. Do not you know
that Mr. Mrs. Come, Kitty, I want you upstairs.” And
gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth
called out,--

“Dear ma’am, do not go. Mr. Elton, his manners did not appear—but no, she would not
permit a hasty or a witty word from herself about his manners. This has been a
most agreeable piece of news indeed. “I had not thought of _that_. A
crowd in a little room—Miss Woodhouse, you have the art of giving
pictures in a few words. As to myself, I am very sorry that you
should have been giving way to any feelings—Nothing could be farther
from my wishes—your attachment to my friend Harriet—your pursuit of
her, (pursuit, it appeared,) gave me great pleasure, and I have been
very earnestly wishing you success: but had I supposed that she were
not your attraction to Hartfield, I should certainly have thought you
judged ill in making your visits so frequent. She doubted whether she had not
transgressed the duty of woman by woman, in betraying her suspicions of
Jane Fairfax’s feelings to Frank Churchill. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to
Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said,--

“I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present
report; and I know I appeared distressed; but don’t imagine it was from
any silly cause. Cole was
telling me that dancing at the rooms at Bath was—Mrs. Her eyes
were red and swollen; and it seemed as if her tears were even then
restrained with difficulty. Darcy had much better finish his letter.”

Mr. Edward Ferrars,
the very young man I used to joke with you about (but however, as it
turns out, I am monstrous glad there was never any thing in it), Mr. Smith, when I next came into the country, would
be that Barton cottage was taken: and I felt an immediate satisfaction
and interest in the event, which nothing but a kind of prescience of
what happiness I should experience from it, can account for. It
was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so
unsuitable a match. Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the cottage, without
attempting a removal to Delaford; and fortunately for Sir John and Mrs. Knightley was thoughtful again. Do not consider me now as an elegant
female intending to plague you, but as a rational creature speaking the
truth from her heart.”

“You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with an air of awkward
gallantry; “and I am persuaded that, when sanctioned by the express
authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of
being acceptable.”

To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no
reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, that if he
persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering
encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered
in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could
not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female. They sat down to tea—the same party round the same table—how often it
had been collected!—and how often had her eyes fallen on the same
shrubs in the lawn, and observed the same beautiful effect of the
western sun!—But never in such a state of spirits, never in any thing
like it; and it was with difficulty that she could summon enough of her
usual self to be the attentive lady of the house, or even the attentive
daughter. “To me it is faultless. The express was sent off directly. Darcy might leave the country, but that
_he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball
the very next week. The prospect of such
delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Jennings in Bond Street,” said he, after the first
salutation, “and she encouraged me to come on; and I was the more
easily encouraged, because I thought it probable that I might find you
alone, which I was very desirous of doing. I can now
say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud,
_I_ have seen nothing of it.”

“I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It
was the very circumstance he could have wished for. Her mother, sisters, Fanny, all had
been conscious of his regard for her at Norland; it was not an illusion
of her own vanity. The young ladies, as well as their mother, were perfectly
satisfied with having two entire strangers of the party, and wished for
no more. Would he have been less gay or less happy in the smiles
of your sister? She liked him—in spite
of his gravity and reserve, she beheld in him an object of interest. She was married—married against her inclination to my
brother. Bingley, and he was looked at with great
admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust
which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be
proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his
large estate in Derbyshire could save him from having a most forbidding,
disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his
friend. “I can never think of
it without laughing.—She hears us, she hears us, Miss Woodhouse. You can hardly doubt the purport
of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to
dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Dashwood could be calm, could be even prudent, when the life
of a child was at stake, and Marianne, satisfied in knowing her mother
was near her, and conscious of being too weak for conversation,
submitted readily to the silence and quiet prescribed by every nurse
around her. Did you ever see her? I do think it is the hardest thing
in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own
children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago
to do something or other about it.”

Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the nature of an entail. Don’t let us be severe, don’t let us be in a hurry to
condemn him. The two eldest little
Knightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of some
weeks in the spring, and their papa now proposed bringing them, and
staying one whole day at Hartfield—which one day would be the very day
of this party.—His professional engagements did not allow of his being
put off, but both father and daughter were disturbed by its happening
so. You will get very tired when tea is over.”

“But you would not wish me to come away before I am tired, papa?”

“Oh! Mrs. And the lock of hair—that too I had always carried about me
in the same pocket-book, which was now searched by Madam with the most
ingratiating virulence,—the dear lock,—all, every memento was torn from
me.”

“You are very wrong, Mr. ’Tis a sad business.”

“Poor Mr. She determined to call upon them and seek safety in numbers. Bingley, and under your orders.”

“Oh, I am not at all afraid of her dying. There is no great wonder in their liking one another;
but that matters should be brought so forward between them, and nobody
suspect it! You both did as much as you could in planning the
marriage. Such a woman as Jane Fairfax probably
never fell in Mrs. “It _is_ a matter of great joy to me;
and I feel the goodness of Colonel Brandon most sensibly. Nothing in my opinion has ever passed to justify
doubt; no secrecy has been attempted; all has been uniformly open and
unreserved. She could not
speak. Gardiner declared his
willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation. Elizabeth immediately began playing again. The first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy a
disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant. It was felt as such things must be felt. good I am sure.—I see it in your countenance. While either of
them protected him and his, Hartfield was safe.—But Mr. He did not leave his name,
     and till the next day it was only known that a gentleman had called
     on business. Her character depends upon those she is with; but in good
hands she will turn out a valuable woman.”

“I am glad you think so; and the good hands, I hope, may not be
wanting.”

“Come,” said he, “you are anxious for a compliment, so I will tell you
that you have improved her. I do not believe I did
you any good. It
would be a disappointment to my father—and altogether—I do not know
that—I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very
well.”

Emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was a little
self-willed, and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure of
dancing with her; but she took the compliment, and forgave the rest. The friendliness of his
disposition made him happy in accommodating those, whose situation
might be considered, in comparison with the past, as unfortunate. It would have suited me in
every respect.”

“How should you have liked making sermons?”

“Exceedingly well. Those who can barely live, and who live perforce in a very
small, and generally very inferior, society, may well be illiberal and
cross. [Illustration:

“Hearing herself called”
]




CHAPTER XXXV. His
wish of staying longer evidently did not please; but it was not
opposed. Forcing herself to speak, therefore,
in the hope of putting it by, she calmly said,

“You are quite in the right; it was most natural to pay your visit,
then”—

He was silent. Cannot you invent a few
hardships for yourself, and be contented to stay?”

“_I_ sick of prosperity and indulgence! Goddard was the mistress of a School—not of a seminary, or an
establishment, or any thing which professed, in long sentences of
refined nonsense, to combine liberal acquirements with elegant
morality, upon new principles and new systems—and where young ladies
for enormous pay might be screwed out of health and into vanity—but a
real, honest, old-fashioned Boarding-school, where a reasonable
quantity of accomplishments were sold at a reasonable price, and where
girls might be sent to be out of the way, and scramble themselves into
a little education, without any danger of coming back prodigies. He only wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself; and if Miss Woodhouse
of Hartfield, the heiress of thirty thousand pounds, were not quite so
easily obtained as he had fancied, he would soon try for Miss Somebody
else with twenty, or with ten. She was
always quick and assured: Isabella slow and diffident. It used to stand here. Weston’s attention was chained; but
when she got to Maple Grove, he could recollect that there were ladies
just arriving to be attended to, and with happy smiles must hurry away. I care for nothing else. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. There could be no harm in a scheme, a mere passive
scheme. my dear Miss Dashwood! Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may insure his
_making_ friends; whether he may be equally capable of _retaining_ them,
is less certain.”

“He has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,” replied Elizabeth,
with emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all
his life.”

Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. Weston understood these joyous prospects. There was nothing in all this either to astonish or interest, and it
caught Emma’s attention only as it united with the subject which
already engaged her mind. Her
mother only scolded her for being nonsensical. While waiting for the carriage, she found Mr. I have
done very little.”

“If it were admissible to contradict a lady,” said the gallant Mr. Bennet, “looking as unconcerned as
may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided she
can have her own way. Willoughby?” said Elinor, reproachfully; “a note
would have answered every purpose. So up he flew directly, and a terrible scene took place, for
Lucy was come to them by that time, little dreaming what was going on. This is an
attachment which a woman may well feel pride in creating. I
hope she is well?”

“Thank you. But the
feelings of the past could not be recalled.—Nothing could restore him
with a faith unbroken—a character unblemished, to Marianne. She was not equal,
however, to much conversation; and when Miss Bingley left them together,
could attempt little beside expressions of gratitude for the
extraordinary kindness she was treated with. To Mr. But one morning—I forget exactly
the day—but perhaps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday before _that_
_evening_, he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocket-book; it was
about spruce-beer. Philips’s house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia’s
pressing entreaties that they would come in, and even in spite of Mrs. “My dear Jane, what is this I hear?—Going to the post-office in the
rain!—This must not be, I assure you.—You sad girl, how could you do
such a thing?—It is a sign I was not there to take care of you.”

Jane very patiently assured her that she had not caught any cold. Time,
however, she thought, would tell him that they ought to be friends
again. Darcy only can answer.”

“But if he does it any more, I shall certainly let him know that I see
what he is about. Davies to be perfectly happy. _You_ must
have seen the difference as well as I. Martin. I was so afraid,
you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I should
have gone quite distracted. Oh, my dear father, can you
suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever
they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the
disgrace?”

Mr. The greatest kindness you can shew me, will be to let me
have my own way, and only say that I am gone when it is necessary.”

Emma had not another word to oppose. Who could have seen through such
thick-headed nonsense? Elton’s meditated activity. He told Patty this, but bid her not
mind it, and be sure not to say any thing to us about it, for Mrs. Or a trident? But I shall always think it a very
abominable sort of proceeding. Lady Elliott wished to give a dance. But she could hear
of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort and ease,
and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter, whose steadier judgment
rejected several houses as too large for their income, which her mother
would have approved. Marianne’s illness, though weakening in its kind, had not been long
enough to make her recovery slow; and with youth, natural strength, and
her mother’s presence in aid, it proceeded so smoothly as to enable her
to remove, within four days after the arrival of the latter, into Mrs. How strange must it appear to him! John Knightley now came into the room
from examining the weather, and opened on them all with the information
of the ground being covered with snow, and of its still snowing fast,
with a strong drifting wind; concluding with these words to Mr. Next
to being married, a girl likes to be crossed in love a little now and
then. Mrs. She was ashamed to think
how much. We shall not be many, you know.”

And Mr. If any thing
could increase her delight, it was perceiving that the baby would soon
have outgrown its first set of caps. “I certainly will come. Robinson.”

“Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. “I should like to know how he behaves among strangers.”

“You shall hear, then--but prepare for something very dreadful. I have met with two instances lately: one I will not mention,
the other is Charlotte’s marriage. If she heard me, it
     was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. At last it
arrested her--and she beheld a striking resemblance of Mr. Weston with exultation, “I told you
all that he would be here before the time named. Perhaps just at present he may be
undecided; the smallness of your fortune may make him hang back; his
friends may all advise him against it. Every idea that had been brought forward by
the housekeeper was favourable to his character; and as she stood before
the canvas, on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon
herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude
than it had ever raised before: she remembered its warmth, and softened
its impropriety of expression. Martin. Elinor, who knew
that such grief, shocking as it was to witness it, must have its
course, watched by her till this excess of suffering had somewhat spent
itself, and then turning eagerly to Willoughby’s letter, read as
follows:

                                    “Bond Street, January. Emma was not thinking of it at the moment, which
made the information she received more valuable. Knightley, of the
difficulties of dependence. Your sweetness
and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to
you. There
is something very pompous in his style. You know how I detest it, unless I am
particularly acquainted with my partner. Jennings
about it myself, but pray tell her I am quite happy to hear she is not
in anger against us, and Lady Middleton the same; and if anything
should happen to take you and your sister away, and Mrs. Mr. The honour was readily
granted, and he then departed, to make himself still more interesting,
in the midst of a heavy rain. “What does Mr. Martin, I suppose, is not a man of information beyond the line of
his own business? Sir John had dropped hints of past injuries and
disappointments, which justified her belief of his being an unfortunate
man, and she regarded him with respect and compassion. Darcy about it,
     if you had rather not. I value not her censure any more than I should do her commendation. Brandon. Weston’s friends were all made happy by her safety; and if the
satisfaction of her well-doing could be increased to Emma, it was by
knowing her to be the mother of a little girl. The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most
convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt, and
to a milliner’s shop just over the way. Elton himself
arrived to triumph in his happy prospects, and circulate the fame of
her merits, there was very little more for him to do, than to tell her
Christian name, and say whose music she principally played. Jane, do you know I always fancy Mr. I have not been accustomed to such
language as this. It does not necessarily follow that a deep,
intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.”

“Lizzy,” cried her mother, “remember where you are, and do not run on in
the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.”

“I did not know before,” continued Bingley, immediately, “that you were
a studier of character. His father was rendered easy by such an assurance,
and Mr. They have
known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love
her better. Weston ventured this
apology for Jane. She had frequently
thought—especially since his father’s marriage with Miss Taylor—that if
she _were_ to marry, he was the very person to suit her in age,
character and condition. Hartfield will only put her out of
conceit with all the other places she belongs to. You do nothing. Woodhouse’s health, cheerful communications about her mother’s, and
sweet-cake from the beaufet—“Mrs. Jennings, however, assured him directly, that she should not stand
upon ceremony, for they were all cousins, or something like it, and she
should certainly wait on Mrs. Such conduct made them of
course most exceedingly laughed at; but ridicule could not shame, and
seemed hardly to provoke them. This is all that I can relate of
the how, where, and when. This, Harriet, is an alliance
which can never raise a blush in either of us.”

“Dear Miss Woodhouse!”—and “Dear Miss Woodhouse,” was all that Harriet,
with many tender embraces could articulate at first; but when they did
arrive at something more like conversation, it was sufficiently clear
to her friend that she saw, felt, anticipated, and remembered just as
she ought. One feels that
it cannot be a very long acquaintance. Bennet could not have chosen
better. But
her commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means
satisfy Mr. do not tell _me_. poor dear,” immediately gave her her salts; and
Sir John felt so desperately enraged against the author of this nervous
distress, that he instantly changed his seat to one close by Lucy
Steele, and gave her, in a whisper, a brief account of the whole
shocking affair. The compliment was just returned, coldly and proudly; and, under
indescribable irritation of spirits, she was then conveyed to
Hartfield. Goddard’s; and a
twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together again, with
any necessity, or even any power of speech. But I must tell you how it went off. Do take it to your sister.”

“Dear Ma’am,” replied Elinor, smiling at the difference of the
complaints for which it was recommended, “how good you are! It is natural that obligation should be
felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. “Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ,” said Frank Churchill, with a
smile at Emma, “the person has not chosen ill. He is not a
young man with whom one can be intimately acquainted in a short time,
but I have seen enough of him to wish him well for his own sake, and as
a friend of yours, I wish it still more. Miss Bingley
succeeded no less in the real object of her civility: Mr. The good sense of Colonel and Mrs. He positively said that it had been known to no being
in the world but their two selves.”

“Well,” said Emma, “I suppose we shall gradually grow reconciled to the
idea, and I wish them very happy. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she
had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him,
that could be so called. Altogether she was quite convinced of Harriet Smith’s being exactly the
young friend she wanted—exactly the something which her home required. She had led her friend astray, and it would be a reproach to her
for ever; but her judgment was as strong as her feelings, and as strong
as it had ever been before, in reprobating any such alliance for him,
as most unequal and degrading. Mrs. And this consideration leads me,
     moreover, to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain
     event of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been
     involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. And there are other
circumstances which I am not at liberty--which it is not worth while to
relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. “You
know his hand, I dare say,—a charming one it is; but that is not
written so well as usual. Woodhouse was almost as much interested in the business as the
girls, and tried very often to recollect something worth their putting
in. He has passed you very often.”

“That may be, and I may have seen him fifty times, but without having
any idea of his name. Mr. But her
death, which happened ten years before his own, produced a great
alteration in his home; for to supply her loss, he invited and received
into his house the family of his nephew Mr. I thought it my
duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she
and her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.’ Mr. It is my party. Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall
all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding.”

Mrs. “Yes; it is about Miss Williams, I am sure.”

“And who is Miss Williams?” asked Marianne. Ferrars very well. Elinor’s thoughts were full of what might be passing in Berkeley Street
during their absence; but a moment’s glance at her sister when they
returned was enough to inform her, that Willoughby had paid no second
visit there. Has Colonel Brandon
been with you lately?”

Elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity, and raise her
self-importance, to agitate her nerves and fill her mind;—and she was
therefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in reply
herself, and from the danger of hearing any thing more from her
brother, by the entrance of Mr. “Aye, _that_ may suit
your humble ideas of yourself;—I know what a modest creature you are;
but it will not satisfy your friends to have you taking up with any
thing that may offer, any inferior, commonplace situation, in a family
not moving in a certain circle, or able to command the elegancies of
life.”

“You are very obliging; but as to all that, I am very indifferent; it
would be no object to me to be with the rich; my mortifications, I
think, would only be the greater; I should suffer more from comparison. Why should you be less fortunate
than your mother? It was only said, ‘Lately,
George Wickham, Esq., to Miss Lydia Bennet,’ without there being a
syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything. Let my accents swell to Mickleham on one side, and
Dorking on the other. The former was divided between admiration of the
brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion and doubt as to
the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The recollection of what I
then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of
it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Colonel Brandon tell you of it! Woodhouse’s account. After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by a
lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. She frequently gave me hints of it. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my
acquaintance but that is all. Churchill take it?”

“Most favourably for his nephew—gave his consent with scarcely a
difficulty. Every thing was
explained to him by Mrs. She was quite convinced of Mr. Do but look,
mama, how sweet! It will then be publicly
seen, that on both sides we meet only as common and indifferent
acquaintance.”

“Yes, very indifferent, indeed,” said Elizabeth, laughingly. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject; and,
affectionately taking her hand, said, in reply,--

“Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Peculiarly lucky!—for as to
any real knowledge of a person’s disposition that Bath, or any public
place, can give—it is all nothing; there can be no knowledge. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found
Elizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred
her husband’s. Miss Bennet’s lovely face
confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what
was due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settled
choice. Collins has made
you an offer of marriage. Patty makes an
excellent apple-dumpling. Beyond the
entrance of the valley, where the country, though still rich, was less
wild and more open, a long stretch of the road which they had travelled
on first coming to Barton, lay before them; and on reaching that point,
they stopped to look around them, and examine a prospect which formed
the distance of their view from the cottage, from a spot which they had
never happened to reach in any of their walks before. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and
thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears. Knightley seemed
little disposed for conversation; Mrs. Is
your loss such as leaves no opening for consolation? “This is not right, Mr. Her power
was sinking; everything _must_ sink under such a proof of family
weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. Frank Churchill to
Richmond. And how does your business go on? Marianne had at first the advantage, but a false step
brought her suddenly to the ground; and Margaret, unable to stop
herself to assist her, was involuntarily hurried along, and reached the
bottom in safety. and Miss Bates, or when Mrs. She then broke the lace off
short, and dexterously throwing it into a ditch, was presently obliged
to entreat them to stop, and acknowledged her inability to put herself
to rights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort. Dixon’s
preference of her music to her friend’s, I can answer for being very
decided.”

“And then, he saved her life. This person’s suspicions, therefore, I have had to oppose, by
endeavouring to appear indifferent where I have been most deeply
interested; and it has not been only once; I have had her hopes and
exultation to listen to again and again. Knightley, in walking
up to Hartfield to breakfast, did not arrive at all too soon; and half
an hour stolen afterwards to go over the same ground again with him,
literally and figuratively, was quite necessary to reinstate her in a
proper share of the happiness of the evening before. You should have
consulted Perry.”

“But, my dear sir, the difference of the journey;—only consider how
great it would have been.—An hundred miles, perhaps, instead of forty.”

“Ah! In such cases my interference was giving you two bad
feelings instead of one.”

“What an amiable creature I was!—No wonder you should hold my speeches
in such affectionate remembrance.”

“‘Mr. Towards _him_ I have been
kinder than towards myself.”

Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection,
but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her. Martin a very amiable young man, and have a great opinion of him; and
his being so much attached to me—and his writing such a letter—but as
to leaving you, it is what I would not do upon any consideration.”

“Thank you, thank you, my own sweet little friend. They
might advance rapidly if they would, however; they must advance somehow
or other whether they would or no. I perfectly comprehend your
feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been. You
must grant me that.”

“No, indeed, I shall grant you nothing. I dare say she did not understand me.”

“I assure you she did. Jennings much more
than civility; and civility of the commonest kind must prevent such a
hasty removal as that.”

“Well then, another day or two, perhaps; but I cannot stay here long, I
cannot stay to endure the questions and remarks of all these people. They were called on to share in
the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses, and
obliged to be as formal and as orderly as the others; but when the
table was again safely covered, when every corner dish was placed
exactly right, and occupation and ease were generally restored, Emma
said,

“The arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me. But we are not all born, you know, with the
same powers,—the same address. When Mrs. Weston do not. ’tis a nice place! You do not make allowance enough for difference of
situation and temper. Harriet had
not been at home; but a note had been prepared and left for her,
written in the very style to touch; a small mixture of reproach, with a
great deal of kindness; and till Mr. We must trespass
a little longer on your kindness.”

“Removed!” cried Bingley. Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed her
delight in the prospect of their relationship. yes, quite well; and so full of your praises, he did nothing but
say fine things of you.”

“I am flattered by his commendation. It was a horrid sight! Knightley is well?” He paused.—She coloured and
laughed.—“I know you saw my letter, and think you may remember my wish
in your favour. Bingley, since you went away,” said Mrs. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. Mr. But before she had been three minutes in her own room,
her mother followed her. That was your doing,
papa. The good was all to myself, by making you an object of
the tenderest affection to me. can it be
possible for this man to be beginning to transfer his affections from
Harriet to me?—Absurd and insufferable!”—Yet he would be so anxious for
her being perfectly warm, would be so interested about her father, and
so delighted with Mrs. Harriet did think him all perfection, and maintained the non-existence
of any body equal to him in person or goodness—and did, in truth, prove
herself more resolutely in love than Emma had foreseen; but yet it
appeared to her so natural, so inevitable to strive against an
inclination of that sort _unrequited_, that she could not comprehend
its continuing very long in equal force. You will not like the noise.”

“But, my dear sir,” cried Mr. I am sure you must have been struck by his awkward
look and abrupt manner, and the uncouthness of a voice which I heard to
be wholly unmodulated as I stood here.”

“Certainly, he is not like Mr. In the evening, soon after Mr. I cannot get him out of my head, but
you must send for him to Barton, and Miss Marianne must try to comfort
him.”

Mr. If _we_ set the example, many will
follow it as far as they can; though all have not our situations. He had frightened her a little about Mr. But it is
impossible not to feel uneasiness. Goddard that Harriet was liable to very bad sore-throats, and had often
alarmed her with them.” Mr. As they walked across the lawn towards the river, Elizabeth turned back
to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also; and while the former was
conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself
suddenly came forward from the road which led behind it to the stables. If they believed him attached to me they would not try to
part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. No sooner was his father’s funeral over, than Mrs. Had you married, you must have been always poor. Colonel, I do not know what you and I shall do without the Miss
Dashwoods;”—was Mrs. [Illustration:

“They had forgotten to leave any message”
]

“But,” he added, “you will of course wish to have your humble respects
delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you
while you have been here.”

Elizabeth made no objection: the door was then allowed to be shut, and
the carriage drove off. There
could not exist in the world _two_ men over whom Mr. “You, who have been the best friend I ever had in my life—Want
gratitude to you!—Nobody is equal to you!—I care for nobody as I do for
you!—Oh! Mrs. My dear Harriet, what do you mean? Selina is no fine lady, I assure
you. Mr. Elton, and Mr. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in
the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux
will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of
whom we shall deprive you.’

“It is evident by this,” added Jane, “that he comes back no more this
winter.”

“It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean he _should_.”

“Why will you think so? They would hardly come in their chaise, I think, at that season
of the year. Elizabeth, who had a letter to
write, went into the breakfast-room for that purpose soon after tea; for
as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be
wanted to counteract her mother’s schemes. ‘Three things very dull indeed.’ That will just do for me, you know. On the contrary, every particular
relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to
myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his
conduct, who will believe me? He feared there must
be some decided involvement. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason; and she continued to rail
bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of
five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about. The liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost
all its value!”

She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real
state of her sister’s spirits. so much ease,
with such perfect good breeding!”

“He is also handsome,” replied Elizabeth, “which a young man ought
likewise to be if he possibly can. Gardiner, who was
walking arm in arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of her
wonder. Martin with either of _them_. She was aware herself, that, parting under any other
circumstances, they certainly should have corresponded more, and that
her intelligence would not have rested, as it now almost wholly did, on
Isabella’s letters. We will settle with your father about the money
afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”

She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and
cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had
not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her
father was at leisure to be consulted. CHAPTER IV


Human nature is so well disposed towards those who are in interesting
situations, that a young person, who either marries or dies, is sure of
being kindly spoken of. I do not know
what she meant, but she asked me if I thought I should go and stay
there again next summer.”

“She meant to be impertinently curious, just as such an Anne Cox should
be.”

“She said he was very agreeable the day he dined there. It is evident,
in spite of his frequent attention to her while she draws, that in fact
he knows nothing of the matter. Elton turned to Mrs. Don’t scruple. Gardiner, who was several years younger
than Mrs. Yes, next week. Mrs. Mr. He rode down for a couple of hours; he could not yet do more; but as he
came from Randalls immediately to Hartfield, she could then exercise
all her quick observation, and speedily determine how he was
influenced, and how she must act. On entering the room, he seemed to
hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was
decided. Conceive what the events of a week have done in that
family! He certainly
might have heard Mr. The past, the present, the future,
Willoughby’s visit, Marianne’s safety, and her mother’s expected
arrival, threw her altogether into an agitation of spirits which kept
off every indication of fatigue, and made her only fearful of betraying
herself to her sister. I shall then go post.”

“Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish you a good journey. Had they fixed on any other man
it would have been nothing; but _his_ perfect indifference and _your_
pointed dislike make it so delightfully absurd! no, my love; but you will soon be tired. The aunt was a capricious woman, and
governed her husband entirely; but it was not in Mr. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their
visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them
both. It is excellent news, capital news, and about
a certain person that we all like.”

Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told that he
need not stay. It was acknowledged, however, that he
was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor. He came with a pretence at an apology from
their sister-in-law, for not coming too; “but she was so much engaged
with her mother, that really she had no leisure for going any where.”
Mrs. I have engaged
Mrs. Elton, before she could be spoken to, was
ready; and before Mr. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant; and since this sad
affair has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly in debt:
but I hope this may be false.”

“Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him,
this could not have happened!”

“Perhaps it would have been better,” replied her sister. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct,
the probity and honour, of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that
Mr. We will not say how near, for fear of shocking the
young ladies.” Then, lowering her voice a little, she said to Elinor,
“She is his natural daughter.”

“Indeed!”

“Oh, yes; and as like him as she can stare. ‘Lady
Catherine,’ said she, ‘you have given me a treasure.’ Are any of your
younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?”

“Yes, ma’am, all.”

“All! Elton’s object?”

“Such an imagination has crossed me, I own, Emma; and if it never
occurred to you before, you may as well take it into consideration
now.”

“Mr. Emma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable home and
happy disposition, seemed to unite some of the best blessings of
existence; and had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with very
little to distress or vex her. She saw that he wanted to engage her on
the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge
him. In that very room she had been measured last September, with her two
friends. He
had turned away, and the horses were in motion. Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get
acquainted with him; and Mr. She had
ventured once alone to Randalls, but it was not pleasant; and a Harriet
Smith, therefore, one whom she could summon at any time to a walk,
would be a valuable addition to her privileges. Dashwood, however, conforming, as she trusted, to the wishes of
that daughter, by whom she then meant in the warmth of her heart to be
guided in every thing, met him with a look of forced complacency, gave
him her hand, and wished him joy. She was
remarkably quick in the discovery of attachments, and had enjoyed the
advantage of raising the blushes and the vanity of many a young lady by
insinuations of her power over such a young man; and this kind of
discernment enabled her soon after her arrival at Barton decisively to
pronounce that Colonel Brandon was very much in love with Marianne
Dashwood. Smallridge—charming woman—most superior—to have the charge
of her three little girls—delightful children. I am no
dancer.”

“If Mrs. “E. There will not be the smallest occasion for your coming
     to town again; therefore stay quietly at Longbourn, and depend on
     my diligence and care. Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it. This seems to have
been a day of general elucidation, for this very morning first unfolded
it to us. I love to look at her; and I will add this praise,
that I do not think her personally vain. Knightley
had once said to her about Mr. It was a long, well-written letter, giving
the particulars of his journey and of his feelings, expressing all the
affection, gratitude, and respect which was natural and honourable, and
describing every thing exterior and local that could be supposed
attractive, with spirit and precision. Darcy in a
most infamous manner. His complexion was white with agitation, and he looked as if
fearful of his reception, and conscious that he merited no kind one. I wish my health allowed me to be a better neighbour. If he fears me, why come hither? I assure you I heard of it in my way through town.”

“My dear Mrs. The carriage was sent to meet
them at----, and they were to return in it by dinnertime. Emma smiled and
chatted as cheerfully as she could, to keep him from such thoughts; but
when tea came, it was impossible for him not to say exactly as he had
said at dinner,

“Poor Miss Taylor!—I wish she were here again. Elton then said, “Nobody can think less of dress in
general than I do—but upon such an occasion as this, when every body’s
eyes are so much upon me, and in compliment to the Westons—who I have
no doubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me honour—I would not wish
to be inferior to others. In Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acquaintance, did Elinor find
a person who could in any degree claim the respect of abilities, excite
the interest of friendship, or give pleasure as a companion. The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate again;
and Miss Smith receiving her summons, was with her without delay, and
unattended by any alarming young man. You would have thrown yourself out of all good society. She had been thinking of him the moment before, as
unquestionably sixteen miles distant.—There was time only for the
quickest arrangement of mind. If I
meet with no insuperable difficulties therefore, consider that point as
settled.”

“Excuse me,” said Jane earnestly, “I cannot by any means consent to
such an arrangement, so needlessly troublesome to your servant. But in general and ordinary cases, between friend and friend,
where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no
very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying
with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?”

“Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange
with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to
appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting
between the parties?”

“By all means,” cried Bingley; “let us hear all the particulars, not
forgetting their comparative height and size, for that will have more
weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. “You have no confidence in me, Marianne.”

“Nay, Elinor, this reproach from _you_—you who have confidence in no
one!”

“Me!” returned Elinor in some confusion; “indeed, Marianne, I have
nothing to tell.”

“Nor I,” answered Marianne with energy, “our situations then are alike. But I do not like the corner into
Vicarage Lane.”

“I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir. Collins began,--

“Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from
doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. It would not be a bad thing for her to be very much in love
with a proper object. The pianoforte at
which Marianne, wrapped up in her own music and her own thoughts, had
by this time forgotten that any body was in the room besides herself,
was luckily so near them that Miss Dashwood now judged she might
safely, under the shelter of its noise, introduce the interesting
subject, without any risk of being heard at the card-table. Mr. But it must not, shall
not be! “Pray, Emma,” said he, “may I ask in what lay the great amusement, the
poignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax? They have brought the whole coach full of playthings for the
children. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the
easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition
could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he
never appeared dissatisfied. Mr. Emma was
very decided in thinking such an attachment no bad thing for her
friend. There are one or two, perhaps,
(glancing at Mr. Martin, and contained a direct proposal
of marriage. You may see her if you look this way.”

As Elinor was certain of seeing her in a couple of minutes, without
taking that liberty, she begged to be excused. She immediately felt
that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her,
must be the work of her brother, and without looking farther, it was
satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made
him think really ill of her. Wickham--when
she read, with somewhat clearer attention, a relation of events which,
if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which
bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself--her feelings
were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition. So very obliging of Mr. Elton. Jennings was eager for
information; but as Elinor wished to spread as little as possible
intelligence that had in the first place been so unfairly obtained, she
confined herself to the brief repetition of such simple particulars, as
she felt assured that Lucy, for the sake of her own consequence, would
choose to have known. Wickham, of course, wanted more than he
     could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable. What did Colonel
Forster say? You shall share
its use with me. Bingley?”

“When I am in the country,” he replied, “I never wish to leave it; and
when I am in town, it is pretty much the same. “If we were in the other room,” said Emma, “if I had my writing-desk, I
am sure I could produce a specimen. There are few people
whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. Elizabeth
smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants. Darcy, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley; “and I am
inclined to think that you would not wish to see _your sister_ make such
an exhibition.”

“Certainly not.”

“To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is,
above her ancles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! Dashwood to stay longer; but, as if he were bent only on
self-mortification, he seemed resolved to be gone when his enjoyment
among his friends was at the height. Weston, best in the world. He turned round on their
coming in, and his countenance showed that he strongly partook of the
emotion which over-powered Marianne. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters
declared that they were miserable. When there, at her own particular request, for
she was impatient to pour forth her thanks to him for fetching her
mother, Colonel Brandon was invited to visit her. Mrs. The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay to
Mr. Why does he make it
any business of his, to wonder at what I do?—at my taking my family to
one part of the coast or another?—I may be allowed, I hope, the use of
my judgment as well as Mr. Let every body on the Hill
hear me if they can. Brandon was very well I hope?”

“Oh! Cole—he was looking on unconcerned; Jane was asked by somebody
else, and he was still talking to Mrs. But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it
was impossible not to try for information. They will
ruin your happiness. Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield
party. Harriet
seemed quite forgotten in the expectation of a pleasant party. Neither wine nor
conversation was any thing to him; and gladly did he move to those with
whom he was always comfortable. She saw their sashes untied, their hair pulled about their ears, their
work-bags searched, and their knives and scissors stolen away, and felt
no doubt of its being a reciprocal enjoyment. Weston depended, and felt, that to be the favourite and intimate of a
man who had so many intimates and confidantes, was not the very first
distinction in the scale of vanity. Towards her husband and mother she
was the same as to them; and intimacy was therefore neither to be
looked for nor desired. When you are tired of eating
strawberries in the garden, there shall be cold meat in the house.”

“Well—as you please; only don’t have a great set out. When she looked at the hedges, she thought the elder at least
must soon be coming out; and when she turned round to Harriet, she saw
something like a look of spring, a tender smile even there. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt’s ill-breeding, and made
no answer. Weston’s disposition and circumstances, which would
make the approaching season no hindrance to their spending half the
evenings in the week together. Weston made his appearance among them. I could do very well without it. Elton was very much disappointed. She was in dancing, singing, exclaiming spirits; and till
she had moved about, and talked to herself, and laughed and reflected,
she could be fit for nothing rational. This is a matter of mere common
politeness and good-breeding, and has nothing to do with any
encouragement to people to marry.”

Emma had done. She had taken up the idea, she
supposed, and made every thing bend to it. Is it so?;”

Elinor told him that it was. “Or will it be wrong? Georgiana’s reception of them was very civil, but attended with
all that embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the
fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves
inferior the belief of her being proud and reserved. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham
could she think, without feeling that she had been blind, partial,
prejudiced, absurd. To youth and natural cheerfulness like Emma’s, though under temporary
gloom at night, the return of day will hardly fail to bring return of
spirits. Knightley should
really—if _he_ does not mind the disparity, I hope, dear Miss
Woodhouse, you will not set yourself against it, and try to put
difficulties in the way. But will they make you happy?”

“Have you any other objection,” said Elizabeth, “than your belief of my
indifference?”

“None at all. These
were great concessions; but where Marianne felt that she had injured,
no reparation could be too much for her to make. You see
we have been wedging one leg with paper. Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. “I am, dear sir,” etc., etc. I know he would be hurt by my
failing in such a mark of respect to him on the present occasion. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no
more; and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account
for it clearly, there seemed little chance of her ever considering it
with less perplexity. It was next to impossible that their cousin should
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. And at last, as if
resolved to qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to its
object, he wound it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of
her person. how unlucky! Dear Mrs. though we have suffered
dreadfully, we are both quite well now, and as happy as we must always
be in one another’s love. and Mrs. They had received her
doubtingly, if not coolly; and nothing beyond the merest commonplace
had been talked almost all the time—till just at last, when Mrs. Elizabeth, equally
next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course. And they both long to
see you of all things, for they have heard at Exeter that you are the
most beautiful creatures in the world; and I have told them it is all
very true, and a great deal more. Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty
begged very hard for a few balls there every winter. But her condemnation of him did not blind her to the
impropriety of their having been written at all; and she was silently
grieving over the imprudence which had hazarded such unsolicited proofs
of tenderness, not warranted by anything preceding, and most severely
condemned by the event, when Marianne, perceiving that she had finished
the letters, observed to her that they contained nothing but what any
one would have written in the same situation. I saw Jane Fairfax
and conversed with her, with admiration and pleasure always—but with no
thought beyond.”

“Well, Mrs. But, my dear Lydia, I don’t
at all like your going such a way off. Weston. His dancing proved to be just what she had believed it, extremely good;
and Harriet would have seemed almost too lucky, if it had not been for
the cruel state of things before, and for the very complete enjoyment
and very high sense of the distinction which her happy features
announced. “What an excellent father you have, girls,” said she, when the door was
shut. Perry’s plan of setting up his carriage?”

Mrs. I am
going away myself.”

“No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. To consult with Colonel Brandon on the best means of effecting the
latter, was a thought which immediately followed the resolution of its
performance; and as soon she had rung up the maid to take her place by
her sister, she hastened down to the drawing-room, where she knew he
was generally to be found at a much later hour than the present. Dixon, you say, is
not, strictly speaking, handsome?”

“Handsome! Churchill, who is as thorough
a fine lady as any body ever beheld.”

Mrs. Elinor
felt all the reasonableness of the idea, and it gave fresh misery to
her reflections. Knightley looked back, and came and sat down by her. Will you come and see me?”

“We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire.”

“I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. If the talking aunt had taken
me quite by surprize, it must have been the death of me. Lydia’s being settled in
the north, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her
company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in
Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a
pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted
with everybody, and had so many favourites. You will
be adored in Highbury. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite
so cordial. they care no more about such things!—”

“The lady then—Miss Grey I think you called her—is very rich?”

“Fifty thousand pounds, my dear. But here is my father coming: you
will not object to my reading the charade to him. Emma could not speak. yes, my dear, I dare say you might, because you know, the door was
open, and the window was open, and Mr. Jennings, and
beginning a journey to London under her protection, and as her guest,
without wondering at her own situation, so short had their acquaintance
with that lady been, so wholly unsuited were they in age and
disposition, and so many had been her objections against such a measure
only a few days before! Elton, nor, under Mrs. “To fall in with each other on such an errand as this,” thought Emma;
“to meet in a charitable scheme; this will bring a great increase of
love on each side. John Dashwood had so much confidence in her husband’s judgment,
that she waited the very next day both on Mrs. and Knightley have every thing their own way.”

“Have not you mistaken the day?” said Emma. Collins had a compliment and an allusion to throw in here, which
were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter. Then,
he said, he would endeavour to see her in the course of this day.”

“I am perfectly satisfied,” replied Emma, with the brightest smiles,
“and most sincerely wish them happy.”

“You are materially changed since we talked on this subject before.”

“I hope so—for at that time I was a fool.”

“And I am changed also; for I am now very willing to grant you all
Harriet’s good qualities. “You are never like me, dear Elinor, or I should wonder at your
composure now. But Mr. “Can you come to-morrow?”

Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation was
accepted with alacrity. for myself, I protest I must be excused,” said Mrs. Dashwood did not hear unmoved the vindication of her former
favourite. She saw, that in persuading herself,
in fancying, in acting to the contrary, she had been entirely under a
delusion, totally ignorant of her own heart—and, in short, that she had
never really cared for Frank Churchill at all! The horror of being
blocked up at Randalls, while her children were at Hartfield, was full
in her imagination; and fancying the road to be now just passable for
adventurous people, but in a state that admitted no delay, she was
eager to have it settled, that her father and Emma should remain at
Randalls, while she and her husband set forward instantly through all
the possible accumulations of drifted snow that might impede them. It
was an union that must have been to the advantage of both: by her ease
and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved;
and from his judgment, information, and knowledge of the world, she must
have received benefit of greater importance. Martin. “His father was an excellent man,” said Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
delighted with it that he agreed with Mr. And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?”

“Because honour, decorum, prudence--nay, interest--forbid it. I shall sit by you. We are to walk about your
gardens, and gather the strawberries ourselves, and sit under
trees;—and whatever else you may like to provide, it is to be all out
of doors—a table spread in the shade, you know. Is she ill?”

“She is not well, she has had a nervous complaint on her for several
weeks.”

“I am sorry for that. Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease
with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many
previous months of suspense and vexation. That he should be married soon, before (as she imagined) he could be in
orders, and consequently before he could be in possession of the
living, surprised her a little at first. But it was neither in Elinor’s power, nor in
her wish, to rouse such feelings in another, by her retailed
explanation, as had at first been called forth in herself. A note was written to urge it. But as it was her determination to subdue it, and to prevent herself
from appearing to suffer more than what all her family suffered on his
going away, she did not adopt the method so judiciously employed by
Marianne, on a similar occasion, to augment and fix her sorrow, by
seeking silence, solitude and idleness. Could anything be so flattering as
Mrs. Suckling was always rather a friend
to the abolition.”

“I did not mean, I was not thinking of the slave-trade,” replied Jane;
“governess-trade, I assure you, was all that I had in view; widely
different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on; but as to
the greater misery of the victims, I do not know where it lies. You were very popular before you came, because
you were Mr. Dashwood as remaining there till she could
accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood, his invitation
was accepted. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without
scolding her: a month passed away before she could speak to Sir William
or Lady Lucas without being rude; and many months were gone before she
could at all forgive their daughter. Ferrars,
not aware of their being Elinor’s work, particularly requested to look
at them; and after they had received gratifying testimony of Lady
Middletons’s approbation, Fanny presented them to her mother,
considerately informing her, at the same time, that they were done by
Miss Dashwood. Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be
necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton. Thank heaven! A low phaeton with a nice little pair
     of ponies would be the very thing. Elizabeth’s mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired
every remarkable spot and point of view. How
do you do, Miss Smith?—Very well I thank you.—And I begged Mrs. CHAPTER VIII. “So unreasonably early!” she was going to
exclaim; but she presently found that it was a family of old friends,
who were coming, like herself, by particular desire, to help Mr. Weston; but stopped, on perceiving that Mrs. But in matters of greater
weight, I may suffer from the want of money. He ought to have opposed the first attempt on their
side to make him slight his father. It has
been completely unexpected. Mrs. He confessed himself
     obliged to leave the regiment on account of some debts of honour
     which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all the ill
     consequences of Lydia’s flight on her own folly alone. This will be complete enjoyment; and I
do not know, Mrs. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above
half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of
her sister’s ruin still more certain; and even Jane, who believed still
less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now
come, when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before
entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some
news of them. I write without any
intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes,
which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the
effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion,
should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written
and read. The chance proved a lucky one, for a message from Mrs. We had better go into the
avenue.”

But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them,
laughingly answered,--

“No, no; stay where you are. how I should like to be married before any of you! We will walk to the
farm at the edge of the down, and see how the children go on; we will
walk to Sir John’s new plantations at Barton Cross, and the Abbeyland;
and we will often go to the old ruins of the Priory, and try to trace
its foundations as far as we are told they once reached. Where _I_ sit is of no consequence. “Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. worse than
cold-hearted! She would be respectable
and happy; and Emma admitted her to be the luckiest creature in the
world, to have created so steady and persevering an affection in such a
man;—or, if not quite the luckiest, to yield only to herself. He has
     more to give. Her character
will be fixed; and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt
that ever made herself and her family ridiculous;--a flirt, too, in the
worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond
youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness of
her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal
contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. Attention, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. He spoke well; but there were feelings besides those of the
heart to be detailed, and he was not more eloquent on the subject of
tenderness than of pride. So far it was all as she had foreseen;
but on entering the house she beheld what no foresight had taught her
to expect. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she
hardly knew of what. _They_ will never be distressed
for money. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few
days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable to
her nieces. Weston found all the others assembled; and
towards this view she immediately perceived Mr. Time, you may be sure, will make one
or the other of us think differently; and, in the meanwhile, we need
not talk much on the subject.”

“You mistake me, you quite mistake me,” she replied, exerting herself. She saw her mother and Marianne change colour; saw them look
at herself, and whisper a few sentences to each other. “Oh, Mary,” said she, “I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun! There was merit in every drawing—in the least finished, perhaps the
most; her style was spirited; but had there been much less, or had
there been ten times more, the delight and admiration of her two
companions would have been the same. Elton; “and that will be our time
for exploring. Mr. I have nothing more to shew you, or to say—except that
I am now going to throw them both behind the fire, and I wish you to
see me do it.”

“My poor dear Harriet! Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an
addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be
important. He merely added, that he should not write
again, till he had something of importance to mention.”

“And my mother--how is she? They
were going to take the two eldest boys to Astley’s. Jennings for two or three days; she was a great
wonderer, as every one must be who takes a very lively interest in all
the comings and goings of all their acquaintance. You must be
satisfied with such admiration as I can honestly give. Marianne,
beautiful as an angel on one side, calling me Willoughby in such a
tone! That good
lady, however, saw only that Marianne had received a letter from
Willoughby, which appeared to her a very good joke, and which she
treated accordingly, by hoping, with a laugh, that she would find it to
her liking. Mr. Gardiner did--a question
which she could not answer without confusion--said scarcely anything. The
officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable,
gentlemanlike set and the best of them were of the present party; but
Mr, Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and
walk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced stuffy uncle Philips,
breathing port wine, who followed them into the room. “Mrs. She was told that now he wrote with
the greatest confidence of being often with them, almost as often as he
could even wish. ‘If _Miss_ _Taylor_ undertakes to
wrap Miss Emma up, you need not have any fears, sir.’ How often have I
heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her!”

“Aye, very true. It was now about the time that she was
likely to call. “Why do you not ask Marianne at once,” said she, “whether she is or she
is not engaged to Willoughby? He has been very deceitful! To be tied down to the regular
payment of such a sum, on every rent day, is by no means desirable: it
takes away one’s independence.”

“Undoubtedly; and after all you have no thanks for it. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young
ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind
listener in Mrs. What a happy day for booksellers,
music-sellers, and print-shops! Gardiner that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she
leaves the south. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so
she asked the two Harringtons to come: but Harriet was ill, and so Pen
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? Willoughby hunts.”

Marianne was surprised and confused, yet she could not help smiling at
the quiet archness of his manner, and after a moment’s silence, said,

“Oh, Edward! Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy
with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine’s
visit. I was
banished to the house of a relation far distant, and she was allowed no
liberty, no society, no amusement, till my father’s point was gained. But Harriet rejected the suspicion with
spirit. Elinor was employed in walking
thoughtfully from the fire to the window, from the window to the fire,
without knowing that she received warmth from one, or discerning
objects through the other; and Marianne, seated at the foot of the bed,
with her head leaning against one of its posts, again took up
Willoughby’s letter, and, after shuddering over every sentence,
exclaimed,—

“It is too much! Bennet could hardly comprehend
it. So imprudent a match on both sides! I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain
from declaring my amazement, at hearing that you received the young
couple into your house as soon as they were married. Mrs. Campbell could not oppose such a
resolution, though their feelings did. Had he never owned his affection to yourself?”

“Oh, no; but if mama had not objected to it, I dare say he would have
liked it of all things. She was overpowered by shame and
vexation. Their intercourse was painful enough by
letter. Oh! But as it
is, it must be out of anybody’s power to assist him. And so does poor Mrs. The
refreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary. Mr. Did you ever hear any thing so strange? Mr. Did you never hear him talk of Mr. It was late in the morning before they returned home; and no sooner had
they entered the house than Marianne flew eagerly up stairs, and when
Elinor followed, she found her turning from the table with a sorrowful
countenance, which declared that no Willoughby had been there. Darcy professed a great
curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently
consented. I will not encourage the
imprudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn.”

A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. She was disturbed by no fear for her
felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct. Supposing him to be attached to
me, would _my_ refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on
his cousin? The shock of Colonel Brandon’s errand at Barton had been much softened
to Mrs. Weston do not trifle with me.—Consider how many of my dearest
friends are now in Brunswick Square. “_That_ was exactly like Robert,” was his immediate observation. I know no man more
likely than Mr. Frank
Churchill’s having the least regard for Jane Fairfax. Elton’s thoughts, and
understand why she was, like herself, in happy spirits; it was being in
Miss Fairfax’s confidence, and fancying herself acquainted with what
was still a secret to other people. At first it was downright dulness to Emma. It was rather a wish of distinction, she
believed, which produced his contemptuous treatment of every body, and
his general abuse of every thing before him. Marianne, who had never much toleration for any thing like
impertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of parts, or even difference of
taste from herself, was at this time particularly ill-disposed, from
the state of her spirits, to be pleased with the Miss Steeles, or to
encourage their advances; and to the invariable coldness of her
behaviour towards them, which checked every endeavour at intimacy on
their side, Elinor principally attributed that preference of herself
which soon became evident in the manners of both, but especially of
Lucy, who missed no opportunity of engaging her in conversation, or of
striving to improve their acquaintance by an easy and frank
communication of her sentiments. Collins’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of
pleasure to Mrs. She wondered, indeed, at his thinking it necessary to do so; but
supposed it to be the proper etiquette. I owed it to her, therefore, to avoid giving any hint of the
truth; and I owed it to my family and friends, not to create in them a
solicitude about me, which it could not be in my power to satisfy.”

Marianne seemed much struck. She could not bear to see him suffering, to know him fancying
himself neglected; and though her understanding almost acquiesced in
the assurance of both the Mr. no. “I hope every body had a pleasant evening,” said Mr. _My_
father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Mrs. “Don’t you find it colder than it was in the morning, Elinor? Let her go, then. My
good, kind brother! His revenge would have been
complete indeed. When I think
of the kindness and favour I have met with, of her excellence and
patience, and my uncle’s generosity, I am mad with joy: but when I
recollect all the uneasiness I occasioned her, and how little I deserve
to be forgiven, I am mad with anger. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be
amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the
second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, “How pleasant it
is to spend an evening in this way! Emma must submit to stand second to Mrs. Mrs. Collins’s correspondence for any
consideration. Knightley. “The sooner every
party breaks up, the better.”

“But you do not consider how it may appear to the Coles. I shall see her in January. “He had just
looked into the dining-room, and as he was not wanted there, preferred
being out of doors.”—She thought he neither looked nor spoke
cheerfully; and the first possible cause for it, suggested by her
fears, was, that he had perhaps been communicating his plans to his
brother, and was pained by the manner in which they had been received. And who knows what _may_ happen? Gardiner. What a strange thing love is! When you
have lived to my age, you will begin to think letters are never worth
going through the rain for.”

There was a little blush, and then this answer,

“I must not hope to be ever situated as you are, in the midst of every
dearest connexion, and therefore I cannot expect that simply growing
older should make me indifferent about letters.”

“Indifferent! Bingley and Jane, she had never doubted; but she
had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and
arrangement of them. He
did not disturb the wretchedness of her mind by ill-timed conversation. It struck
her with dreadful force, and she was ready to give it every bad name in
the world. Mrs. Far be it from me,” he presently continued, in a voice that marked his
displeasure, “to resent the behaviour of your daughter. “Wickham’s a fool if he takes her with a farthing
less than ten thousand pounds: I should be sorry to think so ill of him,
in the very beginning of our relationship.”

“Ten thousand pounds! And there was
time enough for Emma to form a reasonable judgment, as their visit
included all the rest of the morning. She went to it; but the music on which her eye first rested was an
opera, procured for her by Willoughby, containing some of their
favourite duets, and bearing on its outward leaf her own name in his
hand-writing.—That would not do.—She shook her head, put the music
aside, and after running over the keys for a minute, complained of
feebleness in her fingers, and closed the instrument again; declaring
however with firmness as she did so, that she should in future practice
much. I was very unwilling to enter
into it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge and approbation of
his mother; but I was too young, and loved him too well, to be so
prudent as I ought to have been. Knightley’s provoking
indifference about it. Mr. “Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,” cried Colonel
Fitzwilliam. _Her_ change was equal.—This one half-hour had given to each the same
precious certainty of being beloved, had cleared from each the same
degree of ignorance, jealousy, or distrust.—On his side, there had been
a long-standing jealousy, old as the arrival, or even the expectation,
of Frank Churchill.—He had been in love with Emma, and jealous of Frank
Churchill, from about the same period, one sentiment having probably
enlightened him as to the other. “I saw you first in February. Perry can tell me how to convey a wife and
five children a distance of an hundred and thirty miles with no greater
expense or inconvenience than a distance of forty, I should be as
willing to prefer Cromer to South End as he could himself.”

“True, true,” cried Mr. Her eyes were towards Donwell as she walked, but she saw him not. The Netherfield
ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by
trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so
well-bred and agreeable. The carriage was at the door ready to take my poor cousins
away, and they were just stepping in as he came off; poor Lucy in such
a condition, he says, she could hardly walk; and Nancy, she was almost
as bad. And now, poor girl! The quiet, the
retirement of such a life, would have answered all my ideas of
happiness! “This is an evening of wonders, indeed! They were the first entitled, after Mrs. That Frank Churchill thought less of her than he had done, was
indubitable. _I_ never saw such capacity, and taste, and
application, and elegance, as you describe, united.”

Mrs. Bingley’s continued
absence. GARDINER.”

Mr. The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is very
different from almost all the rest. Darcy’s behaviour astonished and vexed
her. The morning was rather favourable, though it had
rained all night, as the clouds were then dispersing across the sky,
and the sun frequently appeared. But I suppose you had no opportunity. I understand that he intends
to take orders. Let me recommend Bath to you. Elton, was
disposed to pay him attention on his marriage. “My friend Mr. And in all probability you will see your brother,
and whatever may be his faults, or the faults of his wife, when I
consider whose son he is, I cannot bear to have you so wholly estranged
from each other.”

“Though with your usual anxiety for our happiness,” said Elinor, “you
have been obviating every impediment to the present scheme which
occurred to you, there is still one objection which, in my opinion,
cannot be so easily removed.”

Marianne’s countenance sunk. But this did not last
long; Elinor had hardly got their last visitors out of her head, had
hardly done wondering at Charlotte’s being so happy without a cause, at
Mr. “You begin to comprehend me, do you?” cried he, turning towards her. To Mrs. But Emma still shook her head in
steady scepticism. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but
this would be nothing if you really liked him.”

“I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her eyes; “I love him. Mrs. I like him very well.”

At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously, that Emma could not
but imagine he had overheard his own praises, and did not want to hear
more;—and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while, till
another suspension brought Mrs. I never
was. Mrs. Their man-servant had been sent one morning to Exeter on business; and
when, as he waited at table, he had satisfied the inquiries of his
mistress as to the event of his errand, this was his voluntary
communication,—

“I suppose you know, ma’am, that Mr. The possibility of a relapse would of course, in
some moments, occur to remind her of what anxiety was—but when she saw,
on her frequent and minute examination, that every symptom of recovery
continued, and saw Marianne at six o’clock sink into a quiet, steady,
and to all appearance comfortable, sleep, she silenced every doubt. He studies too much
for words of four syllables. To be fond of
dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively
hopes of Mr. “My dear, dear Lizzy, I would, I do congratulate you; but are you
certain--forgive the question--are you quite certain that you can be
happy with him?”

“There can be no doubt of that. She was
feeling too much; but at last Emma collected from her enough to
understand the sort of meeting, and the sort of pain it was creating. You have shown him off now much
more than he did himself.”

“I am exceedingly gratified,” said Bingley, “by your converting what my
friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. Humph—Harriet’s ready wit! Her tour to the Lakes
was now the object of her happiest thoughts: it was her best consolation
for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother
and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the
scheme, every part of it would have been perfect. and Mrs. I think it would be much better if they would come
in one afternoon next summer, and take their tea with us—take us in
their afternoon walk; which they might do, as our hours are so
reasonable, and yet get home without being out in the damp of the
evening. When I came to you last week and found you alone, I
came determined to know the truth; though irresolute what to do when it
_was_ known. Weston. Edward will marry Lucy; he
will marry a woman superior in person and understanding to half her
sex; and time and habit will teach him to forget that he ever thought
another superior to _her_.”

“If such is your way of thinking,” said Marianne, “if the loss of what
is most valued is so easily to be made up by something else, your
resolution, your self-command, are, perhaps, a little less to be
wondered at.—They are brought more within my comprehension.”

“I understand you. She went on herself, to give that portion of time to an old
servant who was married, and settled in Donwell. Weston, you would
be quite laid up; do not let them talk of such a wild thing. All that could be done
was, to sit down at that end of the counter which seemed to promise the
quickest succession; one gentleman only was standing there, and it is
probable that Elinor was not without hope of exciting his politeness to
a quicker despatch. Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear
     of his having been to me--and, excepting a sore throat and a
     headache, there is not much the matter with me. Perry. She seldom listened to
anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all. Perry yet;
and he never forgets you.”

“Oh! Though I
_know_ it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him
so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on
setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to
you.”

“If you believed it impossible to be true,” said Elizabeth, colouring
with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the trouble of coming
so far. It was impossible for any one to be more
thoroughly good-natured, or more determined to be happy than Mrs. Their eyes
were immediately wandering up the street in quest of the officers, and
nothing less than a very smart bonnet, indeed, or a really new muslin in
a shop window, could recall them. That Mr. How much could it not tempt her to forgive! Her mother had
died too long ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembrance
of her caresses; and her place had been supplied by an excellent woman
as governess, who had fallen little short of a mother in affection. And do you
really love him quite well enough? Elton no good. As soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor enquired of her about it;
and great was her surprise when she found that every circumstance
related by Mrs. Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. But Mrs. Sir William could not have
interrupted any two people in the room who had less to say for
themselves. “Can this be Mr. Bennet, before you take any, or all of these houses, for your son and
daughter, let us come to a right understanding. You know enough of him to do justice to his solid worth. A cousin of
Mr. He had left them completely frightened; and Harriet
eagerly clinging to him, and hardly able to speak, had just strength
enough to reach Hartfield, before her spirits were quite overcome. Her father’s comfort was amply secured, Mrs. Another view of man, my second brings,
    Behold him there, the monarch of the seas! There was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them as
companions to the Dashwoods; but the cold insipidity of Lady Middleton
was so particularly repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity of
Colonel Brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of Sir John and his
mother-in-law was interesting. Knightley? he is off. Elton, and now did full justice to; and Harriet blushed and smiled,
and said she had always thought Mr. Use those words again, and I
will leave the room this moment.”

Elinor could not help laughing. Lucy does not want sense, and that is the
foundation on which every thing good may be built. We explored
to King’s-Weston twice last summer, in that way, most delightfully,
just after their first having the barouche-landau. She was not much deceived as
to her own skill either as an artist or a musician, but she was not
unwilling to have others deceived, or sorry to know her reputation for
accomplishment often higher than it deserved. Knightley, had seen
so much to blame in his conduct. [Illustration]

Mr. It was a commission to touch every
favourite feeling. He will have her at last; aye, that
he will. But on
the other hand, as Emma wants to see her better informed, it will be an
inducement to her to read more herself. Knightley, that we are by no means
so sure of seeing Mr. Dixon, you could hardly have expected her to be
excused from accompanying Colonel and Mrs. It would be
the natural result of your affection for her. She has
not the open temper which a man would wish for in a wife.”

Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault. Elton was proving himself, in many
respects, the very reverse of what she had meant and believed him;
proud, assuming, conceited; very full of his own claims, and little
concerned about the feelings of others. Darcy, she could not
but allow that Mr. Weston, who
is carefulness itself. When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and Mrs. Well, I was persuaded
there were two. Your
secret is safe with me; but pardon me if I express some surprise at so
unnecessary a communication. Donavan, and Mr. The consideration of Mrs. (looking round with the most good-humoured dependence on
every body’s assent)—Do not you all think I shall?”

Emma could not resist. Tea
passed pleasantly, and nobody seemed in a hurry to move. After a song
or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she
would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her
sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in
the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always
impatient for display. Woodhouse had been safely seated long enough to
give the history of it, besides all the history of his own and
Isabella’s coming, and of Emma’s being to follow, and had indeed just
got to the end of his satisfaction that James should come and see his
daughter, when the others appeared, and Mrs. How merry we shall be together when we meet!”

Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of
these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Mr. Dashwood was prevailed on to
accept the use of his carriage on her journey back, for the better
accommodation of her sick child; and the Colonel, at the joint
invitation of Mrs. I had left her only the evening
before, so fully, so firmly resolved within my self on doing right! and Mrs. The persons to be invited, required little thought. She allowed him to
talk, and arranged the glasses, and wrapped herself up, without opening
her lips. I have brought my other son
and daughter to see you. I
wish I _could_ get him a living, with all my heart. Philips understood from him what Rosings
was, and who was its proprietor, when she had listened to the
description of only one of Lady Catherine’s drawing-rooms, and found
that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all
the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison
with the housekeeper’s room. Every thing as natural
and simple as possible. Harriet was not insensible of manner; she had voluntarily
noticed her father’s gentleness with admiration as well as wonder. The
difference in that respect of Richmond and London was enough to make
the whole difference of seeing him always and seeing him never. Woodhouse good.”

“My father tried it more than once, formerly; but without receiving any
benefit; and Mr. You had better
look about you, and ascertain what you do, and what you mean to do.”

“I thank you; but I assure you you are quite mistaken. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a
note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her
own judgment of her situation. Hear me in silence. Hurst called them to order, with
bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. Little Emma, grow up a better
woman than your aunt. He felt the going
away almost too much to speak of it. You are very obliging to say such things—but certainly not. He concluded with
representing to her the strength of that attachment which in spite of
all his endeavours he had found impossible to conquer; and with
expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of
his hand. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion
was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she
continued,--

“I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. Weston, “if Miss Fairfax were to have
been drawn on beyond her own inclination, by her aunt’s eagerness in
accepting Mrs. I am prodigiously proud of him. We have notice of it in a
letter to-day. On
Edward’s side, more particularly, there was a deficiency of all that a
lover ought to look and say on such an occasion. Elton?”

“Mr. Harriet Smith might think herself
not unworthy of being peculiarly, exclusively, passionately loved by
Mr. When my mother removes into another house my services
shall be readily given to accommodate her as far as I can. /* “Dear Sir, */

     “I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Pray excuse me; but supposing any
little inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy, it cannot be
expected that Emma, accountable to nobody but her father, who perfectly
approves the acquaintance, should put an end to it, so long as it is a
source of pleasure to herself. She had never heard of him before his
entrance into the ----shire militia, in which he had engaged at the
persuasion of the young man, who, on meeting him accidentally in town,
had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Harriet, necessarily drawn away by her engagements with the Martins,
was less and less at Hartfield; which was not to be regretted.—The
intimacy between her and Emma must sink; their friendship must change
into a calmer sort of goodwill; and, fortunately, what ought to be, and
must be, seemed already beginning, and in the most gradual, natural
manner. It will only be sending
Betty by the coach, and I hope I can afford _that_. Elton was called
on, within a month from the marriage of Mr. Dashwood and Elinor then followed,
and the others were left by themselves, to talk of the travellers, and
feel their own dullness, till Mrs. Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and with face turned from
her, did not immediately say any thing; and when she did speak, it was
in a voice nearly as agitated as Emma’s. “Fanny is in her own room, I suppose,” said he: “I will go to her
presently, for I am sure she will not have the least objection in the
world to seeing _you_. Such a friend as Mrs. I do not think it
could disagree with you.”

Emma allowed her father to talk—but supplied her visitors in a much
more satisfactory style, and on the present evening had particular
pleasure in sending them away happy. I cannot see you acting wrong, without a remonstrance. The prospect before her now,
was threatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled—that
might not be even partially brightened. Weston, while the dear
girls walked about the gardens. I am sure you must have
heard of her before. I never had much opinion of the sea air.”

“Mr. The triumph of seeing me so may be open
to all the world. Jennings, “and then perhaps you may
find out what his business is.”

“I do not want to pry into other men’s concerns. His sisters’ uneasiness had been equally excited
with my own: our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered; and, alike
sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother, we
shortly resolved on joining him directly in London. Elton. Till this year, every long vacation since their marriage had
been divided between Hartfield and Donwell Abbey; but all the holidays
of this autumn had been given to sea-bathing for the children, and it
was therefore many months since they had been seen in a regular way by
their Surry connexions, or seen at all by Mr. I dare say he often hears worse
things said than I am going to say. I
did not know my danger till the danger was removed; but with such
feelings as these reflections gave me, I wonder at my recovery,—wonder
that the very eagerness of my desire to live, to have time for
atonement to my God, and to you all, did not kill me at once. Had it been ten, Elinor would have been
convinced that at that moment she heard a carriage driving up to the
house; and so strong was the persuasion that she _did_, in spite of the
_almost_ impossibility of their being already come, that she moved into
the adjoining dressing-closet and opened a window shutter, to be
satisfied of the truth. This is what we all
feel. Weston’s letters. Elinor, confirmed
in every pleasant hope, was all cheerfulness; rejoicing that in her
letters to her mother, she had pursued her own judgment rather than her
friend’s, in making very light of the indisposition which delayed them
at Cleveland; and almost fixing on the time when Marianne would be able
to travel. He was
the brother of her friends, and he took pains to please her; and
altogether, having seen nobody better (that must have been his great
assistant) she might not, while she was at Abbey-Mill, find him
disagreeable. Mr. But it would have broke _my_
heart, had I loved him, to hear him read with so little sensibility. Weston was a great favourite, and there was not a creature in the
world to whom she spoke with such unreserve, as to his wife; not any
one, to whom she related with such conviction of being listened to and
understood, of being always interesting and always intelligible, the
little affairs, arrangements, perplexities, and pleasures of her father
and herself. To know that Marianne was in town
was—in the same language—a thunderbolt.—Thunderbolts and daggers!—what
a reproof would she have given me!—her taste, her opinions—I believe
they are better known to me than my own,—and I am sure they are
dearer.”

Elinor’s heart, which had undergone many changes in the course of this
extraordinary conversation, was now softened again;—yet she felt it her
duty to check such ideas in her companion as the last. “Read it aloud,” said their father, “for I hardly know myself what it is
about.”

     /* RIGHT “Gracechurch Street, _Monday, August 2_. “I am sorry we cannot see your sister, Miss Dashwood,” said Miss
Steele. Lydia does not leave me because she is married;
but only because her husband’s regiment happens to be so far off. I saw them the night before last.”

Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from
Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling. It is a great deal more natural
than one could wish, that a young man, brought up by those who are
proud, luxurious, and selfish, should be proud, luxurious, and selfish
too. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of
his leaving the ----shire, and of his being gone into the Regulars. Emma hoped it must rapidly work Harriet’s cure; but the
sensations which could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very
much.—It was not to be doubted that poor Harriet’s attachment had been
an offering to conjugal unreserve, and her own share in the story,
under a colouring the least favourable to her and the most soothing to
him, had in all likelihood been given also. As for Marianne, on the pangs which so unhappy a meeting must already
have given her, and on those still more severe which might await her in
its probable consequence, she could not reflect without the deepest
concern. You must get his consent before you
ask mine.”

She promised, however, to think of it; and pretty nearly promised,
moreover, to think of it, with the intention of finding it a very good
scheme. Lady Middleton seemed to be roused to
enjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy children after dinner,
who pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put an end to every kind of
discourse except what related to themselves. Dixon’s wedding-present.—So kind of her
to think of my mother! And at others, what a heap of absurdities it is! She endeavoured to
persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be
blind to Miss Bingley’s inattention. “We may treat it as a joke,” said he, at last, recovering from the
affected laugh which had considerably lengthened out the genuine gaiety
of the moment; “but, upon my soul, it is a most serious business. Dashwood
went away delighted with both. It is his own idea. This was the amount of the whole story,—of his communication and of
Harriet’s as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech.—He dared
not stay longer than to see her well; these several delays left him not
another minute to lose; and Emma engaging to give assurance of her
safety to Mrs. It was a more pressing concern to shew attention to Jane Fairfax, whose
prospects were closing, while Harriet’s opened, and whose engagements
now allowed of no delay in any one at Highbury, who wished to shew her
kindness—and with Emma it was grown into a first wish. Time, she knew, must be allowed for this being thoroughly done; and she
could suppose herself but an indifferent judge of such matters in
general, and very inadequate to sympathise in an attachment to Mr. Darcy; and you, yourself, when last at
Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved with
such forbearance and liberality towards him. They are a very respectable family, Mr. But that he
was for ever inconsolable, that he fled from society, or contracted an
habitual gloom of temper, or died of a broken heart, must not be
depended on—for he did neither. Had I died, it would have been self-destruction. There were
two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. I am sure Lizzy will be very happy--I am sure
she can have no objection. Mr. Have you never
happened to see her there?”

She was perfectly sensible that he never had: but she wished to see
whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the
Bingleys and Jane; and she thought he looked a little confused as he
answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. Knightley’s returning your affection?”

“Yes,” replied Harriet modestly, but not fearfully—“I must say that I
have.”

Emma’s eyes were instantly withdrawn; and she sat silently meditating,
in a fixed attitude, for a few minutes. The advice
was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head
ached acutely. Such an immense plantation all round it! Manners were
all that could be safely judged of, under a much longer knowledge than
they had yet had of Mr. “I shall never see her, if she goes by London.”

Elinor perceived with alarm that she was not quite herself, and, while
attempting to soothe her, eagerly felt her pulse. Well, married we were, and came down to Combe Magna to be
happy, and afterwards returned to town to be gay. She must allow him to be still frequently coming to look; any thing
less would certainly have been too little in a lover; and he was ready
at the smallest intermission of the pencil, to jump up and see the
progress, and be charmed.—There was no being displeased with such an
encourager, for his admiration made him discern a likeness almost
before it was possible. If the Westons think it worth while to be at all this
trouble for a few hours of noisy entertainment, I have nothing to say
against it, but that they shall not chuse pleasures for me.—Oh! “Is your sister ill?” said he. She exerted herself, and did try to make her comfortable, by
considering all that had passed as a mere trifle, and quite unworthy of
being dwelt on,

“It might be distressing, for the moment,” said she; “but you seem to
have behaved extremely well; and it is over—and may never—can never, as
a first meeting, occur again, and therefore you need not think about
it.”

Harriet said, “very true,” and she “would not think about it;” but
still she talked of it—still she could talk of nothing else; and Emma,
at last, in order to put the Martins out of her head, was obliged to
hurry on the news, which she had meant to give with so much tender
caution; hardly knowing herself whether to rejoice or be angry, ashamed
or only amused, at such a state of mind in poor Harriet—such a
conclusion of Mr. “This is very strange!—sure he need not wait to be older.”

This delay on the Colonel’s side, however, did not seem to offend or
mortify his fair companion in the least, for on their breaking up the
conference soon afterwards, and moving different ways, Mrs. Knightley, with a degree of vexation, which made Emma immediately
talk of something else, though she could not comprehend why he should
be angry. She was sorry, but could not
repent. Collins,
gratefully accepted, and immediately ordered. What could he mean? At last, however, and after I
had been six months in England, I _did_ find her. I am quite enough in love. When the note was shown to Elinor, as it was within ten minutes after
its arrival, it gave her, for the first time, some share in the
expectations of Lucy; for such a mark of uncommon kindness, vouchsafed
on so short an acquaintance, seemed to declare that the good-will
towards her arose from something more than merely malice against
herself; and might be brought, by time and address, to do every thing
that Lucy wished. Suckling, Mrs. Jennings, were to have taken their
mother by surprise on the following forenoon. Colonel Fitzwilliam,
who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and
address most truly the gentleman. The carriage was sent for them now. It was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable,
that he loved her daughter, and that Elinor returned the partiality. “You will soon be cooler, if you sit still,” said Emma. Her heart did whisper that he had done it for her. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned
towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her Ladyship, after a
while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not
scruple to call out,--

“What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? CHAPTER V


In this state of schemes, and hopes, and connivance, June opened upon
Hartfield. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight, but his
reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his
first introduction. Dixon.—Very well. Darcy can please where he chooses. It is
impossible to express our surprize. You may be very sure I shall always take care of _them_.”

Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the two gentlemen, walked into
the room; and Mrs. Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
valuable neighbour to Mrs. Ferrars. Impossible that any
situation could be more replete with comfort; if we except, perhaps,
Mrs. To John, to Fanny, yes, even to them, little as they
deserve, I had given less than their due. The ladies recovered themselves
first. Towards the
evening Marianne became ill again, growing more heavy, restless, and
uncomfortable than before. Never, even in the
company of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations
at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from
self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could
result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the
acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed, would draw
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and
Rosings. Gardiner, though unknown. Wickham’s affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected to
find it; not equal to Lydia’s for him. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her side a
_scheme_ of infamy. [Illustration]

The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning; and Mr. To Elinor, the
observation of the latter was particularly grateful. Look, she made me this bow to my hat, and put
in the feather last night. Ferrars
was to have been written to about it in such a hurry, she could not
immediately comprehend. Their fates,
their fortunes, cannot be the same; and had the natural sweet
disposition of the one been guarded by a firmer mind, or a happier
marriage, she might have been all that you will live to see the other
be. Because you are so sly about it
yourself, you think nobody else has any senses; but it is no such
thing, I can tell you, for it has been known all over town this ever so
long. It is very right that you _should_ go to
town; I would have every young woman of your condition in life
acquainted with the manners and amusements of London. This is your final resolve! In a short time, I shall have a daughter married. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not yet be
suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to show Mrs. Bates’s; whose house was a little nearer Randalls
than Ford’s; and had all but knocked, when Emma caught their
eye.—Immediately they crossed the road and came forward to her; and the
agreeableness of yesterday’s engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure
to the present meeting. The thing would be for us all to come on
donkeys, Jane, Miss Bates, and me—and my caro sposo walking by. She began, however, seriously to turn her thoughts
towards its accomplishment, and had already mentioned their wishes to
their kind hostess, who resisted them with all the eloquence of her
good-will, when a plan was suggested, which, though detaining them from
home yet a few weeks longer, appeared to Elinor altogether much more
eligible than any other. Elinor is well, you see. Pratt can give her. Elton by her superiority both of mind
and manner; and that, face to face, Mrs. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.”

“Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner time, when she entered the
room and took her place at the table without saying a word. Her pale face and
impetuous manner made him start, and before he could recover himself
enough to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia’s
situation, hastily exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. of what sort?”

“A very serious sort, I assure you;” still smiling. That, from such a quarter, one might
expect. That Emma was his object appeared indisputable. What a blessing it is, when
undue influence does not survive the grave!—He gave his consent with
very little persuasion.”

“Ah!” thought Emma, “he would have done as much for Harriet.”

“This was settled last night, and Frank was off with the light this
morning. Her younger
sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness
which she might in future be able to dispense. You know, my dear, she is going to be to this new lady what Miss Taylor
was to us. Goddard’s hands to shift as she can;—to move, in short, in Mrs. So acutely did Mrs. Their subjects in general were such as belong to an opening
acquaintance. It was very early in September; the season was fine, and from first
seeing the place under the advantage of good weather, they received an
impression in its favour which was of material service in recommending
it to their lasting approbation. Mr. On one side you look across the bowling-green, behind the house, to a
beautiful hanging wood, and on the other you have a view of the church
and village, and, beyond them, of those fine bold hills that we have so
often admired. Knightley, who had nothing of ceremony about him, was offering by his
short, decided answers, an amusing contrast to the protracted apologies
and civil hesitations of the other. I dare say he has; and though it may cut him off from some
advantages, it will secure him many others.”

“Yes; all the advantages of sitting still when he ought to move, and of
leading a life of mere idle pleasure, and fancying himself extremely
expert in finding excuses for it. He said so repeatedly; other things he said too, which
marked the turn of his feelings and gave the lie to his actions. Will you come and
spend some time at Cleveland this Christmas? Gardiner; “but perhaps, to the Lakes.”

No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her
acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. Again she read on. He was storing his memory with anecdotes
and noble names. And _that_ made the men suspect
something, and then they soon found out what was the matter.”

With such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes did Lydia,
assisted by Kitty’s hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her
companions all the way to Longbourn. From the further disadvantage of Lydia’s
society she was of course carefully kept; and though Mrs. Collins, was a very genteel,
pretty kind of girl. She does not know how to hold her tongue, as you must
perceive, and I am sure I was in the greatest fright in the world
t’other day, when Edward’s name was mentioned by Sir John, lest she
should out with it all. Mrs. We have not met since the
26th of November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.”

Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards
took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether
_all_ her sisters were at Longbourn. I wonder what it can be! I
do not say when, but perhaps you may guess where;—in the building in
which N. It only shows her being
deficient in something herself--sense or feeling.”

“Well,” cried Elizabeth, “have it as you choose. Elton, though hesitating
a good deal while he spoke; “I have no hesitation in saying—at least if
my friend feels at all as _I_ do—I have not the smallest doubt that,
could he see his little effusion honoured as _I_ see it, (looking at
the book again, and replacing it on the table), he would consider it as
the proudest moment of his life.”

After this speech he was gone as soon as possible. Jennings. The thing is determined, that is
(laughing affectedly) as far as I can presume to determine any thing
without the concurrence of my lord and master. Knightley, a sensible man about seven or eight-and-thirty, was not
only a very old and intimate friend of the family, but particularly
connected with it, as the elder brother of Isabella’s husband. “The old lady! My doctrine has never aimed at the subjection of
the understanding. How should I
have lived in _your_ remembrance! CHAPTER XI


Mr. It is always the lady’s right to decide on the degree
of acquaintance. It was every day implied, but never
professedly declared. There would have been either the ostentation of a
coxcomb, or the evasions of a mind too weak to defend its own
vanities.—No, I am perfectly sure that he is not trifling or silly.”

With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again, and for a
longer time than hitherto; of judging of his general manners, and by
inference, of the meaning of his manners towards herself; of guessing
how soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldness into her air;
and of fancying what the observations of all those might be, who were
now seeing them together for the first time. Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for driving the young
farmer out of Harriet’s head. The extent of your admiration may take you by surprize some day or
other.”

Mr. He had gone beyond the sweep—some way along the Highbury
road—the snow was nowhere above half an inch deep—in many places hardly
enough to whiten the ground; a very few flakes were falling at present,
but the clouds were parting, and there was every appearance of its
being soon over. If Frank Churchill had wanted to see his father, he would have
contrived it between September and January. Bingley to _her_.”

“Impossible, Mr. How does Mrs. There was intimacy between them, and Mr. Had she merely _dined_ with him, she might
only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must
remember that four evenings have been also spent together--and four
evenings may do a great deal.”

“Yes: these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both
like Vingt-un better than Commerce, but with respect to any other
leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.”

“Well,” said Charlotte, “I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if
she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good a
chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a
twelvemonth. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music than his eldest sister,
his mind was equally at liberty to fix on any thing else; and a thought
struck him during the evening, which he communicated to his wife, for
her approbation, when they got home. ‘I will not say, that since I entered into the
engagement I have not had some happy moments; but I can say, that I
have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour:’—and the quivering
lip, Emma, which uttered it, was an attestation that I felt at my
heart.”

“Poor girl!” said Emma. You are safe from me.”

“There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular
evil, a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.”

“And _your_ defect is a propensity to hate everybody.”

“And yours,” he replied, with a smile, “is wilfully to misunderstand
them.”

“Do let us have a little music,” cried Miss Bingley, tired of a
conversation in which she had no share. They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk
that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for
conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and
disagreeable. Depend upon it, he will be much farther from
doing _you_ justice. Her caution was thrown
away. Elton insisted on being authorised to write an
acquiescence by the morrow’s post.—How Jane could bear it at all, was
astonishing to Emma.—She did look vexed, she did speak pointedly—and at
last, with a decision of action unusual to her, proposed a
removal.—“Should not they walk? I know why you inquire about him, very well; your
sister is to marry him. Green’s, and the
party at Mrs. [Illustration]




CHAPTER LXI. She was sure they should be married some time or
     other, and it did not much signify when. Palmer
had her child, and Mrs. Weston’s disappointment, as might naturally
belong to their friendship. After tea, Mr. Collins well?”

“Yes, very well. He began with great
earnestness to entreat her to refrain from visiting the sick-chamber
again, for the present—to entreat her to _promise_ _him_ not to venture
into such hazard till he had seen Mr. Mr. Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had had time enough to collect
her thoughts, she was able to give such an answer, and make such
observations, as the subject might naturally be supposed to produce. Woodhouse’s fire, looking very deplorable. I could
not walk half so far.”

“No, papa, nobody thought of your walking. Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be satisfied without a dinner at
Hartfield for the Eltons. Palmer and Colonel Brandon would get farther
than Reading that night. The more I see
of the world the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms
my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the
little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of either merit
or sense. But Mrs. Though she dared not depend upon the
consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. Remember.”

Emma was in no danger of forgetting. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an
interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with
calmness, if he really intended to meet them. The
prospect of four thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,
besides the remaining half of his own mother’s fortune, warmed his
heart, and made him feel capable of generosity. You will not like staying
late. Gardiner, “I really
should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by
anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. She had no doubt of what Mr. She wished him to
know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the
place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been
very unexpected--“for your housekeeper,” she added, “informed us that
you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and, indeed, before we
left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected in
the country.” He acknowledged the truth of it all; and said that
business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours
before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. I do not see it.”

“My dear Emma,” said he, moving from his chair into one close by her,
“you are not going to tell me, I hope, that you had not a pleasant
evening.”

“Oh! I really wish you to call with me. There will be enough for every hope and
every fear; and though my attachment to none can equal that of a
parent, it suits my ideas of comfort better than what is warmer and
blinder. Her aunt is a
good creature, but, as a constant companion, must be very tiresome. Now you know all.”

Elinor made no answer. Not, however, from any fear of
disadvantage from it individually to herself; for at any rate there
seemed a gulf impassable between them. Your description of Mrs. Has it not been
industriously circulated by yourselves? Bennet’s best
comfort was, that Mr. I will try again. Chagrined and surprised, they were obliged, though
unwillingly, to turn back, for no shelter was nearer than their own
house. Darcy’s
shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict gave her a
keener sense of her sister’s sufferings. or is it
too short?”

“Yes, indeed, a very good letter,” replied Emma rather slowly—“so good
a letter, Harriet, that every thing considered, I think one of his
sisters must have helped him. And now she was very conscious that she ought
to have prevented them.—She felt that she had been risking her friend’s
happiness on most insufficient grounds. Consider, here are the two
Miss Careys come over from Newton, the three Miss Dashwoods walked up
from the cottage, and Mr. By one measure I
might have saved myself. The Coles expressed themselves so
properly—there was so much real attention in the manner of it—so much
consideration for her father. Jane was already so much recovered
as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening. The gentlemen
pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he was
much handsomer than Mr. Without scruple—without apology—without much apparent
diffidence, Mr. Absolute neglect of the mother and sisters, when invited to come, would
be ingratitude. It was not thrown away on her, she bounded higher than ever,
flew farther down the middle, and was in a continual course of smiles. She could think only of her letter. [Illustration]

“I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle, as they
drove from the town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am much
more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does of the
matter. It is the greatest amusement in the world! Thank Heaven! “So
early in life—at three-and-twenty—a period when, if a man chuses a
wife, he generally chuses ill. Have I explained away any part of my
guilt?”

“Yes, you have certainly removed something—a little. When Denny,
and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they
did not know him in the least. Her mother was surprised, and Elinor again became uneasy. Knightley is quite the gentleman. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you
will not take comfort in mine: believe her to be deceived, by all means. I thank you
again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but
to accept them is absolutely impossible. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go!”

“Very true; and if I had my will we should. He left her house
yesterday, but where he is gone, or whether he is still in town, I do
not know; for _we_ of course can make no inquiry.”

“Poor young man!—and what is to become of him?”

“What, indeed, ma’am! Lucy made room for her with ready attention, and the two fair
rivals were thus seated side by side at the same table, and, with the
utmost harmony, engaged in forwarding the same work. If,
however, by an unforeseen chance it should be in my power to serve him
farther, I must think very differently of him from what I now do, if I
am not as ready to be useful to him then as I sincerely wish I could be
at present. Mr. If it will be any satisfaction to you, however,
to be told, that I believe his character to be in other respects
irreproachable, I am ready to confess it. no, no;—every feeling revolts. I only know that I never yet heard her admit any instance of a second
attachment’s being pardonable.”

“This,” said he, “cannot hold; but a change, a total change of
sentiments—No, no, do not desire it; for when the romantic refinements
of a young mind are obliged to give way, how frequently are they
succeeded by such opinions as are but too common, and too dangerous! May be
his sister is worse at Avignon, and has sent for him over. Wickham’s intention to go into the
Regulars; and, among his former friends, there are still some who are
able and willing to assist him in the army. How else could they come?”

“Very true.—Well, a little while ago it occurred to me how very sad it
would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home again, late at night, and
cold as the nights are now. She could not but hear; she could not avoid answering,

“Till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell,” said she, in a voice of
forced calmness, “I can imagine nothing with any confidence. I am very glad
you liked her. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy’s delight, when she should enter
the room. The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents,
about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again. Do not
you think so?”

Jane did not look round. She must have been a
perpetual enemy. Emma could not regret her having gone to Miss Bates, but she wished she
had left her ten minutes earlier;—it would have been a great pleasure
to talk over Jane Fairfax’s situation with Mr. Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,
because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a
girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is
mercenary.”

“If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know
what to think.”

“She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. “Something very melancholy must be the matter, I am sure,” said she. But if _we_ do not venture, somebody else will; and after
all, Mrs. He would stand to it,
cost him what it might.”

“Then,” cried Mrs. They will stay a good while when they do come,
and he will be half his time with us. I do
think he must have been sent for about money matters, for what else can
it be? She insisted on being
left behind, the next morning, when the others went out. The shortness of his visit, the steadiness of his purpose
in leaving them, originated in the same fettered inclination, the same
inevitable necessity of temporizing with his mother. “I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there is now
in the room a near relation to my patroness. “The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty,” he replied, with great feeling,
“of dividing, or attempting to divide, two young people long attached
to each other, is terrible. They found Mr. He had, by that time,
realised an easy competence—enough to secure the purchase of a little
estate adjoining Highbury, which he had always longed for—enough to
marry a woman as portionless even as Miss Taylor, and to live according
to the wishes of his own friendly and social disposition. She
must know as well as her father, how acceptable an instrument would be;
and perhaps the mode of it, the mystery, the surprize, is more like a
young woman’s scheme than an elderly man’s. Extend it a little farther, and it will make me happy. How are you all?”

“My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly
shaken. But I will not be alarmed, though your sister _does_ play so well. “What have wealth or grandeur
to do with happiness?”

“Grandeur has but little,” said Elinor, “but wealth has much to do with
it.”

“Elinor, for shame!” said Marianne, “money can only give happiness
where there is nothing else to give it. By doing it, I shall feel that I am near you. They had several children. Tell him I hope he will
     excuse me when he knows all, and tell him I will dance with him at
     the next ball we meet with great pleasure. aye, I know your scruples. Ferrars, as well as not
knowing how to get to Plymouth; for Lucy it seems borrowed all her
money before she went off to be married, on purpose we suppose to make
a show with, and poor Nancy had not seven shillings in the world; so I
was very glad to give her five guineas to take her down to Exeter,
where she thinks of staying three or four weeks with Mrs. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and
welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand with an affectionate smile to
Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy, with an
alacrity which showed no doubt of their happiness. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr. He had not been at Donwell for
two years. She approached, and saw
the likeness of Mr. I have read worse
charades. Weston directed the whole, officiating
safely between Hartfield and the Vicarage, and every body was in good
time. Long and her nieces.”
]

Mrs. Weston
had his five minutes share of it; but five minutes were enough to
familiarise the idea to his quickness of mind.—He saw the advantages of
the match, and rejoiced in them with all the constancy of his wife; but
the wonder of it was very soon nothing; and by the end of an hour he
was not far from believing that he had always foreseen it. It is
such a blessing! Sometimes one is guided by what they say of
themselves, and very frequently by what other people say of them,
without giving oneself time to deliberate and judge.”

“But I thought it was right, Elinor,” said Marianne, “to be guided
wholly by the opinion of other people. They were able to love each
other, even as well as they intended. But it shall be regulated, it shall be checked by religion, by reason,
by constant employment.”

She paused—and added in a low voice, “If I could but know _his_ heart,
everything would become easy.”

Elinor, who had now been for some time reflecting on the propriety or
impropriety of speedily hazarding her narration, without feeling at all
nearer decision than at first, heard this; and perceiving that as
reflection did nothing, resolution must do all, soon found herself
leading to the fact. “A man,” said he, “must have a very good opinion of himself when he
asks people to leave their own fireside, and encounter such a day as
this, for the sake of coming to see him. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living
of the neighbourhood in general was beyond the Collinses’ reach. There was always a something, if you
remember, in Willoughby’s eyes at times, which I did not like.”

Elinor could _not_ remember it; but her mother, without waiting for her
assent, continued,

“And his manners, the Colonel’s manners are not only more pleasing to
me than Willoughby’s ever were, but they are of a kind I well know to
be more solidly attaching to Marianne. Mama saw him here once before;—but I was with my uncle at
Weymouth. It was a union of the highest promise of felicity in itself, and
without one real, rational difficulty to oppose or delay it. Good fires and carriages
would be much more to the purpose in most cases of delicate health, and
I dare say in her’s. Mr. How Harriet could ever have had the presumption to raise her thoughts
to Mr. “Yours ever,
“A. “Well,” said she at last, trying to recover herself; “this is a
circumstance which I must think of at least half a day, before I can at
all comprehend it. He came back, had had his hair cut, and laughed at himself with a very
good grace, but without seeming really at all ashamed of what he had
done. June
will soon be here.”

“But I have never fixed on June or any other month—merely looked
forward to the summer in general.”

“But have you really heard of nothing?”

“I have not even made any inquiry; I do not wish to make any yet.”

“Oh! Darcy--that Mr. Elton for my sake; because for your own sake rather, I
would wish it to be done, for the sake of what is more important than
my comfort, a habit of self-command in you, a consideration of what is
your duty, an attention to propriety, an endeavour to avoid the
suspicions of others, to save your health and credit, and restore your
tranquillity. Whenever I
looked towards the past, I saw some duty neglected, or some failing
indulged. Elinor was obliged, though unwillingly, to believe that the sentiments
which Mrs. The
openness and heartiness of her manner more than atoned for that want of
recollection and elegance which made her often deficient in the forms
of politeness; her kindness, recommended by so pretty a face, was
engaging; her folly, though evident was not disgusting, because it was
not conceited; and Elinor could have forgiven every thing but her
laugh. But, my dear Elinor, what is
the matter with Marianne?—she looks very unwell, has lost her colour,
and is grown quite thin. But Jane, it seems,
had a letter from them very lately, and not a word was said about it. It ought to have been a habit with him by this time, of
following his duty, instead of consulting expediency. dashing about with his curricle and hunters! Bates,
might be depended on for bearing him company—Mr. _This_ morning I had fully intended to call
on you, if I could possibly find a spare half hour, but one has always
so much to do on first coming to town. Mrs. Can he be a sensible man, sir?”

“No, my dear; I think not. And I know he has read the
Vicar of Wakefield. How could I ever be foolish enough to
expect a renewal of his love? It saves trouble, and is a something to get me out. There she was welcomed, with the utmost delight, by her father, who had
been trembling for the dangers of a solitary drive from Vicarage
Lane—turning a corner which he could never bear to think of—and in
strange hands—a mere common coachman—no James; and there it seemed as
if her return only were wanted to make every thing go well: for Mr. She spoke as she felt, with earnest
regret and solicitude—sincerely wishing that the circumstances which
she collected from Miss Bates to be now actually determined on, might
be as much for Miss Fairfax’s advantage and comfort as possible. The difference of Harriet at Mrs. But Elinor had more to do; and so anxious was she, for his sake and her
own, to do it well, that she forced herself, after a moment’s
recollection, to welcome him, with a look and manner that were almost
easy, and almost open; and another struggle, another effort still
improved them. Donavan thinks just the same. What made you so shy of me, when you
first called, and afterwards dined here? You must
give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of
believing what I say. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years’
continuance. She knows their ways best; but I should not consider their silence as
any reason for their not meaning to make the present. “I am glad I brought my
bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another band-box! After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus
explained:--“About a month ago I received this letter, and about a
fortnight ago I answered it; for I thought it a case of some delicacy,
and requiring early attention. Their engagements at Exeter instantly gave way before such an
invitation, and Lady Middleton was thrown into no little alarm on the
return of Sir John, by hearing that she was very soon to receive a
visit from two girls whom she had never seen in her life, and of whose
elegance,—whose tolerable gentility even, she could have no proof; for
the assurances of her husband and mother on that subject went for
nothing at all. “One would rather have a stranger
preferred than one’s very particular friend—with a stranger it might
not recur again—but the misery of having a very particular friend
always at hand, to do every thing better than one does oneself!—Poor
Mrs. Harriet expressed herself very much as might be supposed, without
reproaches, or apparent sense of ill-usage; and yet Emma fancied there
was a something of resentment, a something bordering on it in her
style, which increased the desirableness of their being separate.—It
might be only her own consciousness; but it seemed as if an angel only
could have been quite without resentment under such a stroke. “With my mother upstairs. In
understanding, Darcy was the superior. I would
give any money for it. Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for a week;—for whatever
other claims might be made on him, it was impossible that less than a
week should be given up to the enjoyment of Elinor’s company, or
suffice to say half that was to be said of the past, the present, and
the future;—for though a very few hours spent in the hard labor of
incessant talking will despatch more subjects than can really be in
common between any two rational creatures, yet with lovers it is
different. What had really passed between them was to this effect. Collins, but likewise by
     Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have related the affair. This is the last time I shall ever
remember it myself.”

Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elton
must be asked to begin the ball; that she would expect it; which
interfered with all their wishes of giving Emma that distinction.—Emma
heard the sad truth with fortitude. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the
Lucases’ last week; and even Mr. I can understand you—(nodding at Mr. CHAPTER XIII


Emma continued to entertain no doubt of her being in love. Perry, Mrs. I could not have answered it to my conscience to let it
fall into any other hands. In one of these excursive glances she perceived among a group of
young men, the very he, who had given them a lecture on toothpick-cases
at Gray’s. “But it is,” returned she; “for Mrs. On the contrary, I
think a young man might be very safely recommended to take Mr. you have found us out at last, have you, in our seclusion?—I was
this moment telling Jane, I thought you would begin to be impatient for
tidings of us.”

“Jane!”—repeated Frank Churchill, with a look of surprize and
displeasure.—“That is easy—but Miss Fairfax does not disapprove it, I
suppose.”

“How do you like Mrs. Bates’s, he may get there from the Crown in a hop,
step, and jump.”

They were permitted to go alone; and with a cordial nod from one, and a
graceful bow from the other, the two gentlemen took leave. Those that best pleased her, as
placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. “What can it be, Miss Woodhouse?—what can it be? She meant to be very happy, in spite of the scene being laid at Mr. That he had been concerned in the measures
taken to separate Mr. Every body
must be aware that Miss Taylor must be missed, but every body ought
also to be assured that Mr. Besides, there was truth in his looks.”

“It is difficult, indeed--it is distressing. Elton!”

She then took a longer time for consideration. “He is certainly a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as she walked towards
one of the windows. Had he been in a situation to act independently and marry immediately,
it might have been odd that he should leave us without acknowledging
everything to me at once: but this is not the case. Never had she felt so agitated, mortified, grieved, at
any circumstance in her life. Could he ever be tolerably happy with Lucy Steele; could he, were his
affection for herself out of the question, with his integrity, his
delicacy, and well-informed mind, be satisfied with a wife like
her—illiterate, artful, and selfish? Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy. They had been speaking of it as they walked about Highbury the
day before, and Frank Churchill had most earnestly lamented her
absence. His circumstances are now
unembarrassed—he suffers from no evil of that kind; and he thinks only
that he has married a woman of a less amiable temper than yourself. I
really cannot _laugh_ at it. In the former were many good paintings:
but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already
visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss
Darcy’s, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and
also more intelligible. Gilbert.”

“Mrs. You
may have drawn him in.”

“If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.”

“Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? Betty’s sister would never do for them _now_.”

The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the two-penny post from
Lucy herself. You, Miss Woodhouse, I well know, play
delightfully. Weston, perfectly true. It now first
struck her, that _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthy of
being the mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors. Lydia’s intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten: every sister
except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. I do not know the particulars, but I know very
well that Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr. Hour after
hour passed away in sleepless pain and delirium on Marianne’s side, and
in the most cruel anxiety on Elinor’s, before Mr. I hope you
have pleasant accounts from Windsor?”

“Very.”

“And the next news, I suppose, will be, that we are to lose you—just as
I begin to know you.”

“Oh! By his style, I should imagine it just settled.”

“Mr. What is it you are talking
of? The housekeeper came; a respectable looking elderly woman, much less
fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. Your
wife has a claim to your politeness, to your respect, at least. He rose
from his seat, and walked to the window, apparently from not knowing
what to do; took up a pair of scissors that lay there, and while
spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the latter to pieces as
he spoke, said, in a hurried voice,—

“Perhaps you do not know: you may not have heard that my brother is
lately married to—to the youngest—to Miss Lucy Steele.”

His words were echoed with unspeakable astonishment by all but Elinor,
who sat with her head leaning over her work, in a state of such
agitation as made her hardly know where she was. Cole, and since she went away, I was reading it again to my
mother, for it is such a pleasure to her—a letter from Jane—that she
can never hear it often enough; so I knew it could not be far off, and
here it is, only just under my huswife—and since you are so kind as to
wish to hear what she says;—but, first of all, I really must, in
justice to Jane, apologise for her writing so short a letter—only two
pages you see—hardly two—and in general she fills the whole paper and
crosses half. “Wickham, perhaps,
is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ husband quite as well
as Jane’s.”




[Illustration:

“The obsequious civility.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER LX. Not
merely when a state of warfare with one young lady might be supposed to
recommend the other, but from the very first; and she was not satisfied
with expressing a natural and reasonable admiration—but without
solicitation, or plea, or privilege, she must be wanting to assist and
befriend her.—Before Emma had forfeited her confidence, and about the
third time of their meeting, she heard all Mrs. Is not she an angel in every gesture? I knew it was—but
had not resolution enough to part with them.”

“But, Harriet, is it necessary to burn the court-plaister?—I have not a
word to say for the bit of old pencil, but the court-plaister might be
useful.”

“I shall be happier to burn it,” replied Harriet. Dashwood seemed actually working for her,
herself; cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her views! “You were mentioning May. Ferrars’s heart, and that she wishes for nothing so much as to be
on good terms with her children.”

This paragraph was of some importance to the prospects and conduct of
Edward. Elton’s
praise passed from one mouth to another as it ought to do, unimpeded by
Miss Woodhouse, who readily continued her first contribution and talked
with a good grace of her being “very pleasant and very elegantly
dressed.”

In one respect Mrs. In Frank’s last letter she complained, he
said, of being too weak to get into her conservatory without having
both his arm and his uncle’s! I can hardly keep my hands warm
even in my muff. Bingley intended it likewise, and
sometimes made choice of his county; but, as he was now provided with a
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the
remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
purchase. Elton’s knight-errantry
on the subject.—

“Jane Fairfax is absolutely charming, Miss Woodhouse.—I quite rave
about Jane Fairfax.—A sweet, interesting creature. There is great truth, however, in what you have now urged of the
allowances which ought to be made for him, and it is my wish to be
candid in my judgment of every body. We always say what we like to one another.”

Mr. “Now he has got my letter,” said she softly. No, Emma, your amiable young man can be amiable only in
French, not in English. But
they are Lady Middleton’s visitors. She came solitarily down the
gravel walk—a Miss Martin just appearing at the door, and parting with
her seemingly with ceremonious civility. She has been so kind as to promise
it. Elinor was grateful for the attention, but it could not alter her
design; and their mother’s concurrence being readily gained, every
thing relative to their return was arranged as far as it could be;—and
Marianne found some relief in drawing up a statement of the hours that
were yet to divide her from Barton. All the rest, in speculation
at least, was perfectly smooth. Darcy’s steward. He
then said,--

“I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me
exceedingly. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you
will favour me with your company.”

“Go, my dear,” cried her mother, “and show her Ladyship about the
different walks. no;
there would be a Mrs. It was easy to decide that she was still too young;
and Jane remained with them, sharing, as another daughter, in all the
rational pleasures of an elegant society, and a judicious mixture of
home and amusement, with only the drawback of the future, the sobering
suggestions of her own good understanding to remind her that all this
might soon be over. John Dashwood. Wickham were, and that he
     had seen and talked with them both--Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of
all Miss Bingley’s witticisms on _fine eyes_. Nobody, who has not been in the interior
of a family, can say what the difficulties of any individual of that
family may be. Weston
had been almost as uneasy as herself.—In ten minutes, however, the
child had been perfectly well again. On the morning of the third day however, the gloomy anticipations of
both were almost done away; for when Mr. CHAPTER VI


The next morning brought Mr. He was not in his best spirits, but seemed trying to improve them; and,
at last, made himself talk nonsense very agreeably. There will be the leg to be salted, you know, which is so very nice,
and the loin to be dressed directly in any manner they like.”

“That’s right, my dear, very right. Jennings too, an exceedingly well-behaved woman, though not so elegant
as her daughter. His information and prospects
as to Enscombe were neither worse nor better than had been anticipated;
Mrs. She had no objection. The advantages of Bath to the young are pretty generally
understood. His
kindness was not confined to words; for within an hour after he left
them, a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit arrived from the
park, which was followed before the end of the day by a present of
game. Vanity, while seeking its own guilty triumph at the expense of another,
had involved him in a real attachment, which extravagance, or at least
its offspring, necessity, had required to be sacrificed. I know of no submission that _is_ proper for me to make.”

“You may certainly ask to be forgiven,” said Elinor, “because you have
offended;—and I should think you might _now_ venture so far as to
profess some concern for having ever formed the engagement which drew
on you your mother’s anger.”

He agreed that he might. ‘How could he contrive to come? “Did you ever have your likeness taken, Harriet?” said she: “did you
ever sit for your picture?”

Harriet was on the point of leaving the room, and only stopt to say,
with a very interesting naïveté,

“Oh! It was a contrast which recommended him
most forcibly to her mother. Such as
Mrs. Yet, he must
leave them at the end of a week, in spite of their wishes and his own,
and without any restraint on his time. Her admiration and regard, even her sisterly
regard, was all his own; but he was a lover; his attentions were wholly
Marianne’s, and a far less agreeable man might have been more generally
pleasing. Knightley could not be there too often; he
should be glad to see him every day;—but they did see him every day as
it was.—Why could not they go on as they had done? It is a great
change; and though she is amazingly fortunate—such a situation, I
suppose, as no young woman before ever met with on first going out—do
not think us ungrateful, Miss Woodhouse, for such surprising good
fortune—(again dispersing her tears)—but, poor dear soul! the letter had much better be all your own. A very
successful visit:—I saw all the three ladies; and felt very much
obliged to you for your preparatory hint. Must it be so?”

“Oh, Lord! His consenting to marry
her is a proof, I will believe, that he is come to a right way of
thinking. “My poor dear Isabella,” said he, fondly taking her hand, and
interrupting, for a few moments, her busy labours for some one of her
five children—“How long it is, how terribly long since you were here! The evening of the very day on which they went brought a note from Mr. Jennings, who had been inclined from the
first to think Marianne’s complaint more serious than Elinor, now
looked very grave on Mr. This specimen of the Miss Steeles was enough. If we were obliged to go out such an
evening as this, by any call of duty or business, what a hardship we
should deem it;—and here are we, probably with rather thinner clothing
than usual, setting forward voluntarily, without excuse, in defiance of
the voice of nature, which tells man, in every thing given to his view
or his feelings, to stay at home himself, and keep all under shelter
that he can;—here are we setting forward to spend five dull hours in
another man’s house, with nothing to say or to hear that was not said
and heard yesterday, and may not be said and heard again to-morrow. About ten or a dozen years ago,
before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very part
of Derbyshire to which he belonged. He had not time to enter into much explanation. She followed him with
her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough
to help anybody to coffee, and then was enraged against herself for
being so silly! Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed determined to make no
contribution to the comfort of the others, and would not say a word;
and almost every thing that _was_ said, proceeded from Elinor, who was
obliged to volunteer all the information about her mother’s health,
their coming to town, &c. John Knightley’s, and was
destined, if she could please herself, to hold a very honourable
station over the mantelpiece. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes’
conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with
tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous
conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage;
blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the
errors of her daughter must be principally owing. Nobody could be so imprudent! Lord! Her silence
disturbed him; and after observing her a little while, he added,

“Emma, my love, you said that this circumstance would not now make you
unhappy; but I am afraid it gives you more pain than you expected. Your wishes are all moderate.”

“As moderate as those of the rest of the world, I believe. Weston kissed her with tears of joy; and when she could find
utterance, assured her, that this protestation had done her more good
than any thing else in the world could do. No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have
been to blame. She could think of nothing better: and though there was something in it
which her own heart could not approve—something of ingratitude, merely
glossed over—it must be done, or what would become of Harriet? It might be safely viewed with all its
appendages of prosperity and beauty, its rich pastures, spreading
flocks, orchard in blossom, and light column of smoke ascending.—She
joined them at the wall, and found them more engaged in talking than in
looking around. “So my daughter Middleton told me, for it seems Sir John met him
somewhere in the street this morning.” Marianne said no more, but
looked exceedingly hurt. Mrs. He was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to be rather cold hearted
and rather selfish is to be ill-disposed: but he was, in general, well
respected; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge of
his ordinary duties. “She seems a most valuable woman indeed. And that is all that I can recollect of it—but it is very clever all
the way through. Cole’s, turned
to Frank Churchill. Our ages
were nearly the same, and from our earliest years we were playfellows
and friends. Weston, having
said all that he wanted, soon took the opportunity of walking away. Elton emphatically, “which _I_
should not have thought myself privileged to inquire into. Don’t pretend to defend him. “You will think my question an odd one, I dare say,” said Lucy to her
one day, as they were walking together from the park to the
cottage—“but pray, are you personally acquainted with your
sister-in-law’s mother, Mrs. Weston, your argument
weighs most with me. I, and only I, knew your heart and
its sorrows; yet to what did it influence me?—not to any compassion
that could benefit you or myself.—Your example was before me; but to
what avail? Dixon is very musical,
is he? “What are Mrs. She had no sense of superiority then. With what delighted pride she
afterwards visited Mrs. I appeal to Mr. Elton, indeed, could not be denied—and Mrs. That was all very true. Bingley’s invitation, and if he
did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening’s
amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no
scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke,
either from the Archbishop or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to
dance. I am a great advocate for
timidity—and I am sure one does not often meet with it.—But in those
who are at all inferior, it is extremely prepossessing. Jennings. Miss Woodhouse! Richardson was come in her coach, and
would take one of us to Kensington Gardens; so I was forced to go into
the room and interrupt them, to ask Lucy if she would like to go, but
she did not care to leave Edward; so I just run up stairs and put on a
pair of silk stockings and came off with the Richardsons.”

“I do not understand what you mean by interrupting them,” said Elinor;
“you were all in the same room together, were not you?”

“No, indeed, not us. She feared it was what every body
else must think of and predict. Could a linguist, could a grammarian, could even a mathematician
have seen what she did, have witnessed their appearance together, and
heard their history of it, without feeling that circumstances had been
at work to make them peculiarly interesting to each other?—How much
more must an imaginist, like herself, be on fire with speculation and
foresight!—especially with such a groundwork of anticipation as her
mind had already made. Elton’s, I should have imagined, would rather
disgust than gratify Miss Fairfax. “Are you certain
that no servant, no porter has left any letter or note?”

The man replied that none had. She hates whist I know; but is there no round game she cares for?”

“Dear ma’am, this kindness is quite unnecessary. Jenkinson to make up her
party. Weston, I could
not have believed it of you!”

“Aye, we men are sad fellows. you clever creature, that’s very true. Things are settled so
oddly.”

“You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.”

“Ah, sir, I do indeed. Bennet was firm: it
soon led to another; and Mrs. _That_
is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very
important and never open their mouths quite mistake the matter.”

“Did Charlotte dine with you?”

“No, she would go home. Weston may grow cross from the wantonness
of comfort, or his son may plague him.”

“I hope not _that_.—It is not likely. The invitation was accepted; but when the hour of appointment drew
near, necessary as it was in common civility to Mrs. she was considerably worse from this
reappearance of Mr. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread his
features, but he said not a word; and Elizabeth, though blaming herself
for her own weakness, could not go on. Darcy half so well as I do my dear
     Wickham, you must be very happy. Mrs. She must laugh at such a close! Woodhouse was resigned. Oh! Yes, I immediately perceive that it must be the
joint present of Mr. I
think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements. Then, there is a dove-cote, some delightful stew-ponds, and a
very pretty canal; and every thing, in short, that one could wish for;
and, moreover, it is close to the church, and only a quarter of a mile
from the turnpike-road, so ’tis never dull, for if you only go and sit
up in an old yew arbour behind the house, you may see all the carriages
that pass along. “No bad news, Colonel, I hope;” said Mrs. “As soon as I am cooler I shall go back again. I think they judge wisely. Collins! [Illustration]




CHAPTER XIV


[Illustration]

During dinner, Mr. One day’s delay will not be
very material; and till I have written to Mr. The less worthy females were to come in the
evening, with Miss Bates, Miss Fairfax, and Miss Smith; but already, at
dinner, they were too numerous for any subject of conversation to be
general; and, while politics and Mr. This was enough to make Lucy really and
reasonably happy. Elton’s marrying Harriet, it would have been very
kind to open my eyes; but at present I only want to keep Harriet to
myself. But she had believed
them to be well-meaning, worthy people before; and what difference did
this make in the evils of the connexion? Yes, Marianne, even in a man between
thirty and forty. Her heart was grieved for a state which seemed but the more pitiable
from this sort of irritation of spirits, inconsistency of action, and
inequality of powers; and it mortified her that she was given so little
credit for proper feeling, or esteemed so little worthy as a friend:
but she had the consolation of knowing that her intentions were good,
and of being able to say to herself, that could Mr. Elinor had seen so little of Mr. Harriet’s cheerful look and manner established hers: she came back, not
to think of Mr. You divert me against my
conscience. “All this, however,” he continued, “was urged in vain. what do you mean?—Mistake you!—Am I to suppose then?—”

She could not speak another word.—Her voice was lost; and she sat down,
waiting in great terror till Harriet should answer. Is not that your idea?”

“Not quite. Bingley. How can they suit each other? “It has a
disagreeable look to me. I have been but half a friend to her; and if she were _not_ to feel
this disappointment so very much, I am sure I have not an idea of any
body else who would be at all desirable for her;—William Coxe—Oh! [Illustration:

“The spiteful old ladies”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER L. CHAPTER IV


Harriet Smith’s intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing. Bennet was perfectly satisfied; and quitted the house under the
delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of
settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly
see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four
months. Such an
opportunity of being with Edward and his family was, above all things,
the most material to her interest, and such an invitation the most
gratifying to her feelings! Jennings. _One_ person I was sure would represent me as capable of
anything—What I felt was dreadful! Poor dear, it
seems quite cruel to let her be alone. What I endured in so beholding her—but I have
no right to wound your feelings by attempting to describe it—I have
pained you too much already. It was very strange that he should come
to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient
and exceedingly troublesome. He asked me to a party, a
dance at his house in the evening. He had been going to call on them. You thought the
waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I now give it to _you_, if you are resolved on
having him. What am I to tell you? Darcy’s conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a
turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole. Collins met for breakfast a few
minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of
paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary. what news? Now, it so happened that in spite of Emma’s resolution of never
marrying, there was something in the name, in the idea of Mr. My affection for Marianne, my thorough
conviction of her attachment to me—it was all insufficient to outweigh
that dread of poverty, or get the better of those false ideas of the
necessity of riches, which I was naturally inclined to feel, and
expensive society had increased. My dear
Isabella, I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr. here comes Hill. Goddard’s all the rest of her life—or, at least, (for Harriet Smith is
a girl who will marry somebody or other,) till she grow desperate, and
is glad to catch at the old writing-master’s son.”

“We think so very differently on this point, Mr. He had caught both substance and shadow—both fortune and affection, and
was just the happy man he ought to be; talking only of himself and his
own concerns—expecting to be congratulated—ready to be laughed at—and,
with cordial, fearless smiles, now addressing all the young ladies of
the place, to whom, a few weeks ago, he would have been more cautiously
gallant. I shall speak a good word for you to all the
young men, you may depend upon it.”

“I have a notion,” said Sir John, “that Miss Marianne would not object
to such a scheme, if her elder sister would come into it. How to settle the claims of Enscombe
and Hartfield had been a continual impediment—less acknowledged by Mr. It will give you every thing
that you want—consideration, independence, a proper home—it will fix
you in the centre of all your real friends, close to Hartfield and to
me, and confirm our intimacy for ever. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to
him _conditionally_ only.”

“I have not a doubt of Mr. Their mother had nothing, and their
father only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal; for the
remaining moiety of his first wife’s fortune was also secured to her
child, and he had only a life-interest in it. The satisfaction of
prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to
be her husband might then have rested in its proper place. I knew how it
would be. Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. They
talked at first only of the performance. But that was not enough; for
when people are determined on a mode of conduct which they know to be
wrong, they feel injured by the expectation of any thing better from
them. Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied
with believing that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortune
permitted it. “This is the luxury of a large party,” said she:—“one can get near
every body, and say every thing. At first, if you had not
told me that more wonderful things had happened; that there had been
matches of greater disparity (those were your very words);—I should not
have dared to give way to—I should not have thought it possible—But if
_you_, who had been always acquainted with him—”

“Harriet!” cried Emma, collecting herself resolutely—“Let us understand
each other now, without the possibility of farther mistake. I was to decide
on the best of them. Some doubts always lingered in her mind when
they parted, which could only be removed by another half hour’s
discourse with himself. Weston at Ford’s, but he need not hurry any body else.” His
son, too well bred to hear the hint, rose immediately also, saying,

“As you are going farther on business, sir, I will take the opportunity
of paying a visit, which must be paid some day or other, and therefore
may as well be paid now. the proper sport of boys and girls, but a single woman, of
good fortune, is always respectable, and may be as sensible and
pleasant as any body else. who can require it?”

Again they were both silent. Wilfully and
wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged
favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other
dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect
its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young
persons whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could
bear no comparison. However, she seems a very obliging, pretty-behaved
young lady, and no doubt will make him a very good wife. I sent no
answer to Marianne, intending by that to preserve myself from her
farther notice; and for some time I was even determined not to call in
Berkeley Street;—but at last, judging it wiser to affect the air of a
cool, common acquaintance than anything else, I watched you all safely
out of the house one morning, and left my name.”

“Watched us out of the house!”

“Even so. Cole, Mrs. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal
protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as
years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. He is, moreover, aware that she _does_
disapprove the connection, he dares not therefore at present confess to
her his engagement with Marianne, and he feels himself obliged, from
his dependent situation, to give into her schemes, and absent himself
from Devonshire for a while. You have many
parties of that kind here, I suppose, Miss Woodhouse, every summer?”

“No; not immediately here. I will read it to you. My aunt Philips came to Longbourn on
Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till
Thursday with me. Frank Churchill was so extremely—and there was a mat to
step upon—I shall never forget his extreme politeness.—Oh! It was _that_ which threw this
gloom,—even now the recollection of what I suffered—”

He could say no more, and rising hastily walked for a few minutes about
the room. It
implies everything amiable. And I hate Italian singing.—There is no
understanding a word of it. The morning was fine and dry, and Marianne, in her plan of employment
abroad, had not calculated for any change of weather during their stay
at Cleveland. Her
apprehensions once raised, paid by their excess for all her former
security; and the servant who sat up with her, for she would not allow
Mrs. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle
and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way. “And who
is Willoughby?” said he, in a low voice, to Miss Dashwood, by whom he
was sitting. But there is nobody hereabouts
to attach her; and she goes so seldom from home.”

“There does, indeed, seem as little to tempt her to break her
resolution at present,” said Mrs. She had been particularly unwell, however, suffering from
headache to a degree, which made her aunt declare, that had the ball
taken place, she did not think Jane could have attended it; and it was
charity to impute some of her unbecoming indifference to the languor of
ill-health. Bingley’s
name was scarcely ever mentioned between them. Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal
people in the room: he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,
was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one
himself at Netherfield. Marianne’s joy was almost a degree beyond happiness, so great was the
perturbation of her spirits and her impatience to be gone. Dashwood, “is my dear prudent Elinor going to
suggest? Elton. Never had any week passed so quickly—he could hardly believe it
to be gone. yes—Mr. I can much more readily enter into the temptation
of getting away from Miss Bates, than I can believe in the triumph of
Miss Fairfax’s mind over Mrs. Mrs. I do
not look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged. This match, to which you have the
presumption to aspire, can never take place. His property here, his place, his house, every thing is in
such respectable and excellent condition! Every day added something to their knowledge of the
officers’ names and connections. Wickham. Perry, and talked on with much
self-contentment, totally unsuspicious of what they could have told him
in return. He always moved with the
alertness of a mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory, but
now he seemed more sudden than usual in his disappearance. She
would not marry, even if she were asked by Mr. Brandon will be
jealous, if she does not take care.”

“I do not believe,” said Mrs. I am sure I
must have been as white as my gown. ‘It is only Mrs. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted than as
her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. She smiled, and said how she had changed her name since
she was in these parts. Darcy, “There is a very fine old saying, which everybody here is
of course familiar with--‘Keep your breath to cool your porridge,’--and
I shall keep mine to swell my song.”

Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. Elton must now be left to himself. I declare I do not
know a more awful object than Darcy on particular occasions, and in
particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening,
when he has nothing to do.”

Mr. When a woman has five
grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty.”

“In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.”

“But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Collins.”

Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction; and a moment’s
consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it
over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again, and tried
to conceal, by incessant employment, the feelings which were divided
between distress and diversion. Marianne had already sent to say, that she should eat nothing more. Knightley, with smiling but
determined decision, “and been accepted.”

“Good God!” she cried.—“Well!”—Then having recourse to her workbasket,
in excuse for leaning down her face, and concealing all the exquisite
feelings of delight and entertainment which she knew she must be
expressing, she added, “Well, now tell me every thing; make this
intelligible to me. “I told you yesterday,” cried Mr. I am not ashamed of having been
mistaken--or, at least, it is slight, it is nothing in comparison of
what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Weston were less sanguine.”

“He ought to come,” said Emma. She began to
think that he must be in liquor;—the strangeness of such a visit, and
of such manners, seemed no otherwise intelligible; and with this
impression she immediately rose, saying,

“Mr. “When Frank left us,” continued he, “it was quite uncertain when we
might see him again, which makes this day’s news doubly welcome. “Emma, why is it
that they are your enemies?”

He looked with smiling penetration; and, on receiving no answer, added,
“_She_ ought not to be angry with you, I suspect, whatever he may
be.—To that surmise, you say nothing, of course; but confess, Emma,
that you did want him to marry Harriet.”

“I did,” replied Emma, “and they cannot forgive me.”

He shook his head; but there was a smile of indulgence with it, and he
only said,

“I shall not scold you. Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting. Bennet, who could by no means wish for
so speedy a return, immediately said,--

“But is there not danger of Lady Catherine’s disapprobation here, my
good sir? Why should they try to influence him? do come in. Darcy was
here when you sent for us;--was it so?”

“Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement. Only my pattern gown is at
Hartfield. I declare they are quite charming; I could look at
them for ever.” And then sitting down again, she very soon forgot that
there were any such things in the room. Yours ever,

“CAROLINE BINGLEY.”

“With the officers!” cried Lydia: “I wonder my aunt did not tell us of
_that_.”

“Dining out,” said Mrs. “Why will not you write one yourself for us, Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable: his society was
irksome, and his attachment to her must be imaginary. It might be weeks, it might be only a few days,
before the horse were useable; but no preparations could be ventured
on, and it was all melancholy stagnation. The selfish sagacity of the latter, which had
at first drawn Robert into the scrape, was the principal instrument of
his deliverance from it; for her respectful humility, assiduous
attentions, and endless flatteries, as soon as the smallest opening was
given for their exercise, reconciled Mrs. At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels
placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. And as to laughter, we will not expose
ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject. She is as low as
possible. But what was that, when such friends were to be met?”

“Perhaps, Miss Marianne,” cried Lucy, eager to take some revenge on
her, “you think young men never stand upon engagements, if they have no
mind to keep them, little as well as great.”

Elinor was very angry, but Marianne seemed entirely insensible of the
sting; for she calmly replied,

“Not so, indeed; for, seriously speaking, I am very sure that
conscience only kept Edward from Harley Street. He did not believe it to proceed from any thing that
care and medicine might not remove, or at least that she might not have
many years of existence before her; but he could not be prevailed on,
by all his father’s doubts, to say that her complaints were merely
imaginary, or that she was as strong as ever. Regard for a former
servant of my own, who had since fallen into misfortune, carried me to
visit him in a spunging-house, where he was confined for debt; and
there, in the same house, under a similar confinement, was my
unfortunate sister. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next
morning, “if that disagreeable Mr. How they were all to be conveyed, he would have made a difficulty if he
could, but as his son and daughter’s carriage and horses were actually
at Hartfield, he was not able to make more than a simple question on
that head; it hardly amounted to a doubt; nor did it occupy Emma long
to convince him that they might in one of the carriages find room for
Harriet also. For many years of
her life she had had two sons; but the crime and annihilation of Edward
a few weeks ago, had robbed her of one; the similar annihilation of
Robert had left her for a fortnight without any; and now, by the
resuscitation of Edward, she had one again. In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired, she was soon joined by
Mrs. When she was half-way up the set, the whole group were
exactly behind her, and she would no longer allow her eyes to watch;
but Mr. Goddard’s, ma’am?” asked Mrs. The power of doing anything with
quickness is always much prized by the possessor, and often without any
attention to the imperfection of the performance. You have scolded me too much for match-making,
for me to presume to take such a liberty with you. I wonder what curacy he will get! She seemed to propose shewing no agitation, or
disappointment, or peculiar concern in the discovery. Every thing declared it; his own attentions, his father’s hints, his
mother-in-law’s guarded silence; it was all in unison; words, conduct,
discretion, and indiscretion, told the same story. No, we should not have heard, if it had not been
for this particular circumstance, of her being to come here so soon. “You are a good woman,” he warmly replied. Elton bears the disappointment?”

“Say nothing, my dear Emma, while you oblige me to read—not even of
Mrs. Oh, my sweetest Lizzy! Woodhouse was soon composed enough for talking
as usual. Pray make my excuses and adieus to
her.” This, Emma could not doubt, was all for herself. Perhaps there was some truth in
     _this_; though I doubt whether _his_ reserve, or _anybody’s_
     reserve can be answerable for the event. He did not suppose they could be damp
now, in the middle of the day. You knew I
should not stir till my lord and master appeared.—Here have I been
sitting this hour, giving these young ladies a sample of true conjugal
obedience—for who can say, you know, how soon it may be wanted?”

Mr. I must go and comfort mama. One ought not to repine; but,
to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! However,
this does make a difference; and, perhaps, when we come to talk it
over—but these sort of things require a good deal of consideration. With _them_ he is remarkably
agreeable.”

“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. They have some of the finest woods in the
country.”

Elizabeth said no more; but her mind could not acquiesce. Marianne was to have the best place by the fire,
was to be tempted to eat by every delicacy in the house, and to be
amused by the relation of all the news of the day. Hurst had, therefore, nothing to do but to stretch himself on one of the
sofas and go to sleep. Now they seemed in pleasant
conversation. You are very ill.”

“No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. What
could be more natural than his asking you again? Nothing, but that the lessons of her past folly might teach her
humility and circumspection in future. Bennet the
compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf. I like them all.”

“You know Miss Fairfax’s situation in life, I conclude; what she is
destined to be?”

“Yes—(rather hesitatingly)—I believe I do.”

“You get upon delicate subjects, Emma,” said Mrs. When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in
search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view. Vanity and pride are different
things, though the words are often used synonymously. A very decent
shot, and there is not a bolder rider in England.”

“And is _that_ all you can say for him?” cried Marianne, indignantly. Elton’s notice and the penury of her
conversation, rather than return to the superior companions who have
always loved her with such real, generous affection.”

Jane had come to Highbury professedly for three months; the Campbells
were gone to Ireland for three months; but now the Campbells had
promised their daughter to stay at least till Midsummer, and fresh
invitations had arrived for her to join them there. Oh dear, no! This event, highly important to Mrs. Her heart was in a glow, and she feared her
face might be as hot. Jennings and Charlotte. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.”

“_That_ will make your Ladyship’s situation at present more pitiable;
but it will have no effect on _me_.”

“I will not be interrupted! Her feelings altered towards Emma.—Offended, probably, by the
little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with, she drew
back in her turn and gradually became much more cold and distant; and
though the effect was agreeable, the ill-will which produced it was
necessarily increasing Emma’s dislike. Now,
however, I see nothing in it but a very natural and consistent degree
of discretion. Beyond a competence, it can
afford no real satisfaction, as far as mere self is concerned.”

“Perhaps,” said Elinor, smiling, “we may come to the same point. Harriet bore the intelligence very well—blaming nobody—and in every
thing testifying such an ingenuousness of disposition and lowly opinion
of herself, as must appear with particular advantage at that moment to
her friend. She needed no time for deliberation or inquiry. Willoughby wherever he goes, and so you may tell your sister. This is the estimation in which you hold me! Her
next beginning was,

“In one respect, perhaps, Mr. Reynolds
was of no trifling nature. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to be pitied; in
     which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs. A few months
ago it would have hurt her exceedingly; but it was not in Mrs. Weston; and at last would begin admiring her
drawings with so much zeal and so little knowledge as seemed terribly
like a would-be lover, and made it some effort with her to preserve her
good manners. One must speak a little, you know. Look at those hills! The resemblance between her and her
mother was strikingly great. But she is very young: she has never
been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half year,
nay, for a twelvemonth, she has been given up to nothing but amusement
and vanity. “While I can have my mornings to myself,” said she, “it is enough. Elinor, for some time after he left her, for some time even after the
sound of his carriage had died away, remained too much oppressed by a
crowd of ideas, widely differing in themselves, but of which sadness
was the general result, to think even of her sister. You and the girls may go--or you may send
them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better; for as you are
as handsome as any of them, Mr. Do not involve
yourself, or endeavour to involve him, in an affection which the want of
fortune would make so very imprudent. These were charming feelings—but not lasting. Such a beautiful hind-quarter of pork! The want of proper families in the place, and the conviction
that none beyond the place and its immediate environs could be tempted
to attend, were mentioned; but he was not satisfied. I was
afraid they might not; and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle,
so I was determined he should know it, and so I let down the side glass
next to him, and took off my glove and let my hand just rest upon the
window frame, so that he might see the ring, and then I bowed and
smiled like anything.”

Elizabeth could bear it no longer. Wingfield considers it _very_ sickly
except—

“Ah! Be sure to give me
intelligence of the letter as soon as possible.”

Mrs. Wickham
appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation;
but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the
officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become “stupid,
disagreeable fellows.” Some of them were to dine with the Philipses the
next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr. They would be married, and settled either at or near
Enscombe. Such might be
his constitution; and as she knew that eating and drinking were often
the cure of such incidental complaints, she recommended his taking some
refreshment; he would find abundance of every thing in the
dining-room—and she humanely pointed out the door. I give you notice—You will find me a formidable
antagonist on that point. There was only Harriet, who seemed not in spirits herself,
fagged, and very willing to be silent; and Emma felt the tears running
down her cheeks almost all the way home, without being at any trouble
to check them, extraordinary as they were. I would wish every thing
to be as much to your taste as possible.”

“That I am sure you would. Forster, the necessity of
opening her eyes to his character never occurred to me. I am sure I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it; and as to
your giving them more, it is quite absurd to think of it. Weston had, by gentle encouragement, overcome so much of her
embarrassment, as to bring her to converse on the important subject. Bingley if she could. I could not bear to have Henry supplanted.—Mr. “How is she, Miss Dashwood? E., and her _caro_ _sposo_, and her
resources, and all her airs of pert pretension and underbred finery. She was pleased, on taking leave, to find Miss Fairfax determined to
attend her out of the room, to go with her even downstairs; it gave her
an opportunity which she immediately made use of, to say,

“It is as well, perhaps, that I have not had the possibility. Weston’s judgment; and they were so very closely followed by another
carriage of cousins, who had been entreated to come early with the same
distinguishing earnestness, on the same errand, that it seemed as if
half the company might soon be collected together for the purpose of
preparatory inspection. Harriet was a little distressed—did look a little foolish at first: but
having once owned that she had been presumptuous and silly, and
self-deceived, before, her pain and confusion seemed to die away with
the words, and leave her without a care for the past, and with the
fullest exultation in the present and future; for, as to her friend’s
approbation, Emma had instantly removed every fear of that nature, by
meeting her with the most unqualified congratulations.—Harriet was most
happy to give every particular of the evening at Astley’s, and the
dinner the next day; she could dwell on it all with the utmost delight. Elizabeth at first had rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer
the dining parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a
pleasanter aspect: but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent
reason for what she did, for Mr. Happy
had it been for her, if her regard for Edward had depended less on his
own merit, than on the merit of his nearest relations! yes, extremely well; that is, I do not believe many people are
acquainted with him, because Combe Magna is so far off; but they all
think him extremely agreeable I assure you. He approached, and addressing himself rather to Elinor than
Marianne, as if wishing to avoid her eye, and determined not to observe
her attitude, inquired in a hurried manner after Mrs. “Oh! Jennings. Miss Bingley’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last
very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to
see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most
tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Knightley, if I take the liberty (I consider myself,
you know, as having somewhat of the privilege of speech that Emma’s
mother might have had) the liberty of hinting that I do not think any
possible good can arise from Harriet Smith’s intimacy being made a
matter of much discussion among you. Do not be
afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your
privilege of universal good-will. Elton might not be of an imprudent, inconsiderate
disposition as to money matters; he might naturally be rather attentive
than otherwise to them; but then, Mr. Elton’s engagement in the conversation of Highbury, as the latest
interest had entirely borne down the first, so now upon Frank
Churchill’s disappearance, Mr. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my
positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I
have often observed, that resignation is never so perfect as when the
blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such things,
I know, are all chance in this world. “Oh, did not you? If I were to go through the world, I could not
meet with a better. Marianne
saw and listened with increasing surprise. The bustle and joy of
such an arrival, the many to be talked to, welcomed, encouraged, and
variously dispersed and disposed of, produced a noise and confusion
which his nerves could not have borne under any other cause, nor have
endured much longer even for this; but the ways of Hartfield and the
feelings of her father were so respected by Mrs. How humiliating is this
discovery! MY DEAR MADAM,


“If I made myself intelligible yesterday, this letter will be expected;
but expected or not, I know it will be read with candour and
indulgence.—You are all goodness, and I believe there will be need of
even all your goodness to allow for some parts of my past conduct.—But
I have been forgiven by one who had still more to resent. _Perfection_ should not have come quite so soon.”

“Oh! have you heard the news?”

“No, ma’am. Mr. That
was the act of a very, very young man, one too young to consider
whether the inconvenience of it might not very much exceed the
pleasure. The fact is, I suppose, that she is tired of Enscombe. You have already ascertained
Mr. It became her turn to listen. I should be mortified indeed if I did not believe I had
been of some use; but it is not every body who will bestow praise where
they may. “We allowed unnecessary room. Time did not compose her. If one could ascertain what the chief
of them—the Coles, for instance. Her mother’s ungraciousness
made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth’s mind;
and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell
him, that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of
the family. When you leave Barton to form your own establishment
in a more lasting home, Queen Mab shall receive you.”

This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood; and in the whole of the
sentence, in his manner of pronouncing it, and in his addressing her
sister by her Christian name alone, she instantly saw an intimacy so
decided, a meaning so direct, as marked a perfect agreement between
them. Jennings,
laughing heartily; “for he is one of the modestest, prettiest behaved
young men I ever saw; but as for Lucy, she is such a sly little
creature, there is no finding out who _she_ likes.”

“Oh,” cried Miss Steele, looking significantly round at them, “I dare
say Lucy’s beau is quite as modest and pretty behaved as Miss
Dashwood’s.”

Elinor blushed in spite of herself. And is she, at seventeen, just
entering into life, just beginning to be known, to be wondered at
because she does not accept the first offer she receives? She
watched him well. After this had been settled, Colonel Brandon began to talk of his own
advantage in securing so respectable and agreeable a neighbour, and
_then_ it was that he mentioned with regret, that the house was small
and indifferent; an evil which Elinor, as Mrs. The Lucases are very artful people, indeed,
sister. Woodhouse, and he could only be kept tolerably
comfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughter’s side, and
by exertions which had never cost her half so much before. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to
assist Mr. “But gaiety never
was a part of _my_ character.”

“Nor do I think it a part of Marianne’s,” said Elinor; “I should hardly
call her a lively girl—she is very earnest, very eager in all she
does—sometimes talks a great deal and always with animation—but she is
not often really merry.”

“I believe you are right,” he replied, “and yet I have always set her
down as a lively girl.”

“I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mistakes,” said
Elinor, “in a total misapprehension of character in some point or
other: fancying people so much more gay or grave, or ingenious or
stupid than they really are, and I can hardly tell why or in what the
deception originated. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so
little agreeable to her. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.”

“I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,” said Darcy,
“of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. It must be
all conjecture.”

“Conjecture—aye, sometimes one conjectures right, and sometimes one
conjectures wrong. The children are all fond of him.”

“And then their uncle comes in, and tosses them up to the ceiling in a
very frightful way!”

“But they like it, papa; there is nothing they like so much. Elton
left them no choice. I cannot think so very ill of
Wickham. Wickham’s charge exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could
bring no proof of its injustice. For the present, he could not be spared, to his “very great
mortification and regret; but still he looked forward with the hope of
coming to Randalls at no distant period.”

Mrs. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr. Weston, who “could not stay five minutes, and
wanted particularly to speak with her.”—He met her at the parlour-door,
and hardly asking her how she did, in the natural key of his voice,
sunk it immediately, to say, unheard by her father,

“Can you come to Randalls at any time this morning?—Do, if it be
possible. Knightley returned to his reading with greater alacrity. Weston begs you to put on your tippet. Collins. Jennings, who read it aloud with many comments of satisfaction and
praise. I love him already.”

“I think you will like him,” said Elinor, “when you know more of him.”

“Like him!” replied her mother with a smile. Then she is no rule for Mrs. “Who that knows what his misfortunes have been can help feeling an
interest in him?”

“His misfortunes!” repeated Darcy, contemptuously,--“yes, his
misfortunes have been great indeed.”

“And of your infliction,” cried Elizabeth, with energy; “You have
reduced him to his present state of poverty--comparative poverty. Jennings came immediately to their room on her return, and without
waiting to have her request of admittance answered, opened the door and
walked in with a look of real concern. Jane was not happy. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of
her hand, but in vain. Bennet’s sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been
enough to drive happiness away. Leave it all to me. When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen,
they returned down stairs; and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were
consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall door. Mrs. “Reserved!—how, in
what manner? and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all
since you went away. I will attack them with more address. Campbell; quite depend upon it; nothing can be more kind or pressing
than their _joint_ invitation, Jane says, as you will hear presently;
Mr. Wrapt up in a cloak of politeness, she seemed
determined to hazard nothing. “You have heard, I suppose,” said he with great solemnity, as soon as
he was seated, “of the very shocking discovery that took place under
our roof yesterday.”

They all looked their assent; it seemed too awful a moment for speech. “Shall we ask him why a man of sense and
education, and who has lived in the world, is ill-qualified to recommend
himself to strangers?”

“I can answer your question,” said Fitzwilliam, “without applying to
him. Mrs. I
shall hear of every thing that is going on among you. He was nice in his eating,
uncertain in his hours; fond of his child, though affecting to slight
it; and idled away the mornings at billiards, which ought to have been
devoted to business. When their promised visit to the Park and consequent introduction to
these young ladies took place, they found in the appearance of the
eldest, who was nearly thirty, with a very plain and not a sensible
face, nothing to admire; but in the other, who was not more than two or
three and twenty, they acknowledged considerable beauty; her features
were pretty, and she had a sharp quick eye, and a smartness of air,
which though it did not give actual elegance or grace, gave distinction
to her person. CHAPTER XLVII. I am exceedingly obliged to you, Mrs. During his present short stay, Emma had barely seen him; but just
enough to feel that the first meeting was over, and to give her the
impression of his not being improved by the mixture of pique and
pretension, now spread over his air. But _your_ arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation,
have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family. It mortifies me. I have been always telling you, my love, that I had no idea of
the change being so very material to Hartfield as you apprehended; and
now you have Emma’s account, I hope you will be satisfied.”

“Why, to be sure,” said Mr. And Mr. Long,” said Miss Lucas, “but I
wish he had danced with Eliza.”

“Another time, Lizzy,” said her mother, “I would not dance with _him_,
if I were you.”

“I believe, ma’am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him.”

“His pride,” said Miss Lucas, “does not offend _me_ so much as pride
often does, because there is an excuse for it. Edward, she believed, was still in town, and
fortunately she had heard his address from Miss Steele. It is almost past belief. You will only think I feel _more_ than I ought to do when I
tell you all.”

“What do you mean?”

“Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. His name, he replied, was Willoughby, and his present home was
at Allenham, from whence he hoped she would allow him the honour of
calling tomorrow to enquire after Miss Dashwood. Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily
drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. “What! As her successor in that house, she
regarded her with jealous abhorrence. The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. He put the
letter into Elinor’s hands. To be in company, nicely dressed herself and
seeing others nicely dressed, to sit and smile and look pretty, and say
nothing, was enough for the happiness of the present hour. His temptation is
not adequate to the risk.”

“Do you really think so?” cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment. Nothing
can be kinder than her behaviour; and she can hardly do all this,
without being aware of the expectation it raises.”

“But she raises none in those most concerned. Knightley. Collins would undoubtedly have been
much less in his own apartment had they sat in one equally lively; and
she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement. Mrs. But what can be the matter?—Is she really not
ill?”

“Depend upon me—but ask no more questions. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended
less on any single event, or any particular person; for though they
each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. You, my mother,
and Margaret, must henceforth be all the world to me; you will share my
affections entirely between you. Weston. but indeed I would much rather have it only in one. “If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,”
said Mrs. Weston. Knightley. “Some very fine morning, he, and Emma, and Harriet, could go
very well; and he could sit still with Mrs. She thanked him again and again; and, with a sweetness of address which
always attended her, invited him to be seated. Ferrars
is certainly nothing to me at present—but the time _may_ come—how soon
it will come must depend upon herself—when we may be very intimately
connected.”

She looked down as she said this, amiably bashful, with only one side
glance at her companion to observe its effect on her. This information, however, startled Mrs. Edward had two
thousand pounds, and Elinor one, which, with Delaford living, was all
that they could call their own; for it was impossible that Mrs. She turned her eyes towards his face, and found him with some surprise
to be her brother. But I make no doubt they
often talk of it between themselves. He and I had a great
deal of talk about it; and the best of all is, that he is gone back
again to Harley Street, that he may be within call when Mrs. “I would rather be talking to you,” he replied; “but as it seems a
matter of justice, it shall be done.”

He began—stopping, however, almost directly to say, “Had I been offered
the sight of one of this gentleman’s letters to his mother-in-law a few
months ago, Emma, it would not have been taken with such indifference.”

He proceeded a little farther, reading to himself; and then, with a
smile, observed, “Humph! She could scarcely eat any
dinner, and when they afterwards returned to the drawing room, seemed
anxiously listening to the sound of every carriage. Weston, with a very good grace, immediately exclaimed,

“My dear madam! Dashwood could spare
them perfectly well; and Elinor, who now understood her sister, and saw
to what indifference to almost every thing else she was carried by her
eagerness to be with Willoughby again, made no farther direct
opposition to the plan, and merely referred it to her mother’s
decision, from whom however she scarcely expected to receive any
support in her endeavour to prevent a visit, which she could not
approve of for Marianne, and which on her own account she had
particular reasons to avoid. How languid their conversation the
last evening of their being together! [Illustration:

     “But now it comes out”
]




CHAPTER LVII. Suppose I go and invite Miss Bates to join us?”

“Well—if you please,” said Mrs. You forget how time passes.”

“Three-and-twenty!—is he indeed?—Well, I could not have thought it—and
he was but two years old when he lost his poor mother! And as it is some
months since Miss Campbell married, the impression may be a little worn
off.”

“Yes, he has been gone just four weeks, as you observe, Miss
Woodhouse,” said Miss Bates, “four weeks yesterday.—A Miss
Hawkins!—Well, I had always rather fancied it would be some young lady
hereabouts; not that I ever—Mrs. And all the grandeur of the
connexion seemed dependent on the elder sister, who was _very_ _well_
_married_, to a gentleman in a _great_ _way_, near Bristol, who kept
two carriages! And extremely acceptable it is, for we must live at a great
expense while we are here.”

He paused for her assent and compassion; and she forced herself to say,

“Your expenses both in town and country must certainly be considerable;
but your income is a large one.”

“Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be
requited. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her
triumph. Jennings won’t think it too much trouble to give us
a call, should she come this way any morning, ’twould be a great
kindness, and my cousins would be proud to know her.—My paper reminds
me to conclude; and begging to be most gratefully and respectfully
remembered to her, and to Sir John, and Lady Middleton, and the dear
children, when you chance to see them, and love to Miss Marianne,


“I am, &c.”


As soon as Elinor had finished it, she performed what she concluded to
be its writer’s real design, by placing it in the hands of Mrs. I could change my
shoes, you know, the moment I got home; and it is not the sort of thing
that gives me cold.”

“Indeed!” replied he. But the whole of
their behaviour to each other has been unaccountable! We must remember to let James know that the carriage will
be wanted on Tuesday. And so, Darcy did everything;
made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow’s debts, and got him
his commission! I hope I never ridicule what is wise or good. Mrs. Gardiner smiled. If such goodness does not make her miserable now,
she will never deserve to be happy! Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a courtesy; and
on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be,
succeeded for a few moments. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared
something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is
over, shall I own that I long for your return? His doing so
drew her notice. Lord! I shall keep it only till
you can claim it. He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but, with a moment’s
recollection, and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen
him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man,
asked her how she had liked him. Forster to Meryton,
from whence they were to set out early the next morning. All his wishes centered in domestic comfort and
the quiet of private life. You must write again very soon, and praise him a great deal more
than you did in your last. Elton, just as he ought,
entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again. Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match: but she said
less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness;
nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Dixon. Mr. Her manners, too—and Mr. Nothing can stand more retired from
the road than Maple Grove. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a
thousand tender recollections. Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing,
by the servant’s account, that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but
satisfying them instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the
cause of their summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on
the postscript of the last with trembling energy. CHAPTER XLII. Wallis sent them by her boy; they are extremely civil and obliging
to us, the Wallises, always—I have heard some people say that Mrs. Elinor, Elinor, they who suffer little may be proud
and independent as they like—may resist insult, or return
mortification—but I cannot. It would have spared her from
explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give;
but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion,
of her attachment to Mr. That is, I know you must have seen her
a hundred times—but are you acquainted?”

“Oh! Darcy were by no means over. What arises from discretion must be
honoured.”

“You think her diffident. The
     death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of
     this. He had no idea of me. Mrs. I require so much! You do not know it I dare say, but two or three years ago I had a great
passion for taking likenesses, and attempted several of my friends, and
was thought to have a tolerable eye in general. But one must not expect every thing; though I
suppose it would be no difficult matter to widen them. I have heard her every year of our lives since we both began. Darcy is not coming here again with
our dear Bingley! Bennet was not in the
habit of walking, Mary could never spare time, but the remaining five
set off together. (turning
to Emma.) Will you chuse a wife for me?—I am sure I should like any
body fixed on by you. He saw a
short word prepared for Emma, and given to her with a look sly and
demure. Jennings received the refusal with some surprise, and
repeated her invitation immediately. Mrs. I believe I did not play with the children quite so much
as usual. Society, I own, is necessary to me. what do you mean?”

“He likes you. How is half such a sum to be
repaid?”

Mr. In as short a time as Mr. By whom can you have heard it mentioned?”

“By many—by some of whom you know nothing, by others with whom you are
most intimate, Mrs. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no
longer hope to be benefited by it. He joined her and Marianne in the breakfast-room the next morning
before the others were down; and Marianne, who was always eager to
promote their happiness as far as she could, soon left them to
themselves. The ground covered
with snow, and the atmosphere in that unsettled state between frost and
thaw, which is of all others the most unfriendly for exercise, every
morning beginning in rain or snow, and every evening setting in to
freeze, she was for many days a most honourable prisoner. Mrs. He could sing a little himself. But James will not like to put the horses to for such a
little way;—and where are the poor horses to be while we are paying our
visit?”

“They are to be put into Mr. When they stopped at the door, Mrs. “You know what you are about.”

“And when she had come away, Mrs. She had
nothing to wish otherwise, but that the days did not pass so swiftly. And so would Anne, if her
health had allowed her to apply. His father
had no apprehension of it. Name your
day, and I will come. Why they are your
cousins, you know, after a fashion. there is not much difference. I know Mr. Elton seemed most favourably impressed by
the size of the room, the entrance, and all that she could see or
imagine. My excellent father
died about five years ago; and his attachment to Mr. Darcy to marry
your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make
_their_ marriage at all more probable? Her father’s feelings were quite distinct. [Illustration:

“The elevation of his feelings.”
]




CHAPTER XXXVIII. I cannot
descend to be tricked out of assurances, that are not really wanted.”

She then left the room; and Elinor dared not follow her to say more,
for bound as she was by her promise of secrecy to Lucy, she could give
no information that would convince Marianne; and painful as the
consequences of her still continuing in an error might be, she was
obliged to submit to it. do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Her congratulations were warm
and open; but Emma could not speak so fluently. It exactly answers my idea
of a fine country, because it unites beauty with utility—and I dare say
it is a picturesque one too, because you admire it; I can easily
believe it to be full of rocks and promontories, grey moss and brush
wood, but these are all lost on me. Wingfield in town as her father could be
of Mr. As she sat one morning, looking forward to exactly such a close of the
present day, a note was brought from Mrs. “Good heavens!” she exclaimed, “he is there—he is there—Oh! Then, perhaps, you cannot tell me what
sort of a woman she is?”

“No,” returned Elinor, cautious of giving her real opinion of Edward’s
mother, and not very desirous of satisfying what seemed impertinent
curiosity; “I know nothing of her.”

“I am sure you think me very strange, for enquiring about her in such a
way,” said Lucy, eyeing Elinor attentively as she spoke; “but perhaps
there may be reasons—I wish I might venture; but however I hope you
will do me the justice of believing that I do not mean to be
impertinent.”

Elinor made her a civil reply, and they walked on for a few minutes in
silence. Amongst them were Sir John and Lady Middleton and Mrs. Oh!—you
need not be afraid of owning it to me, for Mr. “I cannot see why Mrs. It was very lucky, for I would not
have had poor James think himself slighted upon any account; and I am
sure she will make a very good servant: she is a civil, pretty-spoken
girl; I have a great opinion of her. Gardiner. Every part of it brought pain and humiliation, of some sort or
other; but, compared with the evil to Harriet, all was light; and she
would gladly have submitted to feel yet more mistaken—more in
error—more disgraced by mis-judgment, than she actually was, could the
effects of her blunders have been confined to herself. Woodhouse was persuaded
to spend with his daughter at Randalls, was passed by the two young
people in schemes on the subject. I do not pretend to it. A fine open sea, he says, and very pure air. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes to press his
friend to join it. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XXX. He admires as a lover, not as a
connoisseur. Ferrars considered it in that
light; a very gratifying circumstance you know to us all. Upon my word, Jane
on one arm, and me on the other!—Stop, stop, let us stand a little
back, Mrs. Mrs. Use your own discretion, however, in communicating to
her what I have told you. “As to
her _younger_ daughters, she could not take upon her to say--she could
not positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession;--her
_eldest_ daughter she must just mention--she felt it incumbent on her to
hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.”

Mr. You
are so much used to live alone, that you do not know the value of a
companion; and, perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comfort a
woman feels in the society of one of her own sex, after being used to
it all her life. You
are his object—and you will soon receive the completest proof of it. Well, he is a
very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there is the least
chance in the world of her ever getting him now. She had already satisfied herself that he thought Harriet a beautiful
girl, which she trusted, with such frequent meetings at Hartfield, was
foundation enough on his side; and on Harriet’s there could be little
doubt that the idea of being preferred by him would have all the usual
weight and efficacy. He delighted in
going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected. It may be proper to conceal their engagement (if they
_are_ engaged) from Mrs. “I declare, I do not know when I have heard any thing that has given me
more satisfaction!—It always has quite hurt me that Jane Fairfax, who
plays so delightfully, should not have an instrument. Frank Churchill hardly knows what to say
when you speak of Miss Fairfax’s situation in life. You have no compassion on my poor nerves.”

“You mistake me, my dear. She stared, coloured,
doubted, and was silent. Jennings recollected that there was
a lady at the other end of the street on whom she ought to call; and as
she had no business at Gray’s, it was resolved, that while her young
friends transacted their’s, she should pay her visit and return for
them. But how is your acquaintance
to be long supported, under such extraordinary despatch of every
subject for discourse? John Knightley, ashamed of his ill-humour, was now all kindness and
attention; and so particularly solicitous for the comfort of her
father, as to seem—if not quite ready to join him in a basin of
gruel—perfectly sensible of its being exceedingly wholesome; and the
day was concluding in peace and comfort to all their little party,
except herself.—But her mind had never been in such perturbation; and
it needed a very strong effort to appear attentive and cheerful till
the usual hour of separating allowed her the relief of quiet
reflection. Now there’s
Mr. Imprudent as a marriage between Mr. Jennings should
be abandoned to the mercy of Marianne for all the comfort of her
domestic hours. She would have been too happy but for poor Harriet; but every blessing
of her own seemed to involve and advance the sufferings of her friend,
who must now be even excluded from Hartfield. The error
has been all my own; and I do assure you that, with all the excuse that
present circumstances may appear to give, I shall yet dread making the
story known to Colonel Campbell.’”

“Poor girl!” said Emma again. “Then,” observed Elizabeth, “you must comprehend a great deal in your
idea of an accomplished woman.”

“Yes; I do comprehend a great deal in it.”

“Oh, certainly,” cried his faithful assistant, “no one can be really
esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met
with. It so happened that while her two sisters
with Mrs. dear, Miss Woodhouse—well, at last, I fancy, he looked round
and saw me; for instead of going on with her buyings, they began
whispering to one another. Darcy?” thought she. It had been a very happy
fortnight, and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common
course of Hartfield days. Mr. Do not tell his father, but that young man is not quite
the thing. But while the imaginations of
other people will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our
conduct, and to decide on it by slight appearances, one’s happiness
must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance. papa, we have missed seeing them but one entire day since they
married. She began almost to feel a
dislike of Edward; and it ended, as every feeling must end with her, by
carrying back her thoughts to Willoughby, whose manners formed a
contrast sufficiently striking to those of his brother elect. Charming people, Mr. Weston was acting no part, feigning no feelings in all that she
said to him in favour of the event.—She had been extremely surprized,
never more so, than when Emma first opened the affair to her; but she
saw in it only increase of happiness to all, and had no scruple in
urging him to the utmost.—She had such a regard for Mr. His visit was duly paid. The laurels at Maple Grove are in the same profusion as here, and stand
very much in the same way—just across the lawn; and I had a glimpse of
a fine large tree, with a bench round it, which put me so exactly in
mind! Mr. Weston is the very best country-dance player, without exception, in
England. “Then, my dear Isabella, it is the most
extraordinary sort of thing in the world, for in general every thing
does give you cold. Her manners gave some re-assurance to Edward, and he had courage enough
to sit down; but his embarrassment still exceeded that of the ladies in
a proportion, which the case rendered reasonable, though his sex might
make it rare; for his heart had not the indifference of Lucy’s, nor
could his conscience have quite the ease of Elinor’s. He
is so very superior. You are
each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so
easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will
always exceed your income.”

“I hope not so. She was
without any power, because she was without any desire of command over
herself. But,
luckily, he came back again in ten minutes’ time, and then we all set
out. Oh! She sat in an agony of impatience which affected
every feature. She does not depend upon his coming so much as I do: but she does not
know the parties so well as I do. To give you
another instance of her liberality:—The other day, as soon as we came
to town, aware that money could not be very plenty with us just now,
she put bank-notes into Fanny’s hands to the amount of two hundred
pounds. And his behaviour, so
strikingly altered,--what could it mean? Knightley for that purpose. I dare say I shall
soon see them here.”

Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. Elton sat down with Mr. But before she was half way upstairs she heard the parlour
door open, and, turning round, was astonished to see Edward himself
come out. A fortnight’s acquaintance is certainly
very little. Weston’s marriage her exercise had been too much confined. Call upon her, by all means.”

“There is no necessity for my calling this morning,” said the young
man; “another day would do as well; but there was that degree of
acquaintance at Weymouth which—”

“Oh! Darcy would connect himself with a family, where to every other
objection would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest
kind with the man whom he so justly scorned. I
shall wear a large bonnet, and bring one of my little baskets hanging
on my arm. Churchill.”

He had hoped she would speak again, but she did not. [Illustration]

Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister’s room, and in the
morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the
inquiries which she very early received from Mr. I shall be no support to Mrs. Elton, and found nothing so
interesting as the discussion of his concerns; and every report,
therefore, every guess—all that had already occurred, all that might
occur in the arrangement of his affairs, comprehending income,
servants, and furniture, was continually in agitation around her. Elinor first spoke. My temper I dare not vouch
for. Their lodgings were not long a secret,
and at length they began to know the officers themselves. It can be
round in five minutes.”

“Thank you, thank you—but on no account.—I would rather walk.—And for
_me_ to be afraid of walking alone!—I, who may so soon have to guard
others!”

She spoke with great agitation; and Emma very feelingly replied, “That
can be no reason for your being exposed to danger now. Bates; but I have been so
pleasantly detained! We have now been here almost
a fortnight, and yet he does not come. He had formerly
visited at Stanhill, but it was too long for his young cousins to
remember him. Weston at the same time, walking briskly with long steps
through the passage, was calling out,

“You talk a great deal of the length of this passage, my dear. I feel that all the apologies should be on my side. I was introducing her into good company, and giving her the
opportunity of pleasing some one worth having; I ought not to have
attempted more. Born to the
prospect of such affluence! They are very fond of being at Hartfield, Harriet.”

“I dare say they are, sir. Churchill’s temper, before we pretend to decide upon what her nephew
can do. “How strange this is! It is only that he is blessed with
greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally
pleasing, than any other man.”

“You are very cruel,” said her sister, “you will not let me smile, and
are provoking me to it every moment.”

“How hard it is in some cases to be believed! She dared not even
mention that gentleman. She sat by the drawing-room
fire after tea, till the moment of Lady Middleton’s arrival, without
once stirring from her seat, or altering her attitude, lost in her own
thoughts, and insensible of her sister’s presence; and when at last
they were told that Lady Middleton waited for them at the door, she
started as if she had forgotten that any one was expected. Her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitude to Mrs. How unlucky! Jennings was summoned to her chaise
to take comfort in the gossip of her maid for the loss of her two young
companions; and Colonel Brandon immediately afterwards took his
solitary way to Delaford. The man and one of the maids were sent off immediately into Devonshire,
to prepare the house for their mistress’s arrival; for as Lady
Middleton was entirely unknown to Mrs. I do not know any body who draws so
well as you do. I wonder whether it is so. Jennings went out by herself on
business, and Elinor began her letter directly, while Marianne, too
restless for employment, too anxious for conversation, walked from one
window to the other, or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation. “When
is your next ball to be, Lizzy?”

“To-morrow fortnight.”

“Ay, so it is,” cried her mother, “and Mrs. I could hardly keep my countenance. What say you, Marianne?”

“I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I do not now. He expressed no regret for what he had done
which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. Harris, and an order for post-horses
directly, she wrote a few lines to her mother. They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves, before he began to
speak of Edward; for he, too, had heard of the living, and was very
inquisitive on the subject. Darcy’s proposals. I am going to-morrow
where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has
neither manners nor sense to recommend him. This is quite
the season indeed for friendly meetings. She was then obliged to be finished, and
make her appearance. She remembered what Mr. They all rose up in
preparation for a round game. He was invited on good faith. Kitty, run down and order the carriage. how ashamed I should be of not
being married before three-and-twenty! Oh! Ferrars can never forget that Edward is her son.”

“You surprise me; I should think it must nearly have escaped her memory
by _this_ time.”

“You wrong her exceedingly. The whole of Lucy’s behaviour in the affair, and the prosperity which
crowned it, therefore, may be held forth as a most encouraging instance
of what an earnest, an unceasing attention to self-interest, however
its progress may be apparently obstructed, will do in securing every
advantage of fortune, with no other sacrifice than that of time and
conscience. How could he spare half ten thousand
pounds?”

“If we are ever able to learn what Wickham’s debts have been,” said
Elizabeth, “and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall
exactly know what Mr. He was wishing to get the better of his
attachment to herself, she just recovering from her mania for Mr. As dinner was not to be ready in less than two hours from their
arrival, Elinor determined to employ the interval in writing to her
mother, and sat down for that purpose. Mr. Elinor’s office was a painful one.—She was going to remove what she
really believed to be her sister’s chief consolation,—to give such
particulars of Edward as she feared would ruin him for ever in her good
opinion,-and to make Marianne, by a resemblance in their situations,
which to _her_ fancy would seem strong, feel all her own disappointment
over again. To be sitting long after dinner,
was a confinement that he could not endure. It was drawn at the same time as the
other--about eight years ago.”

“I have heard much of your master’s fine person,” said Mrs. Knightley’s carriage had brought, and was to take them home
again.’ I was quite surprized;—very glad, I am sure; but really quite
surprized. I believe he is one of the very
best-tempered men that ever existed. “Do
you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on
them, as nonsense? Another meeting will suffice to explain his sentiments on
picturesque beauty, and second marriages, and then you can have nothing
farther to ask.”

“Elinor,” cried Marianne, “is this fair? I do think Mrs. What strength, or what
constancy of affection he might be subject to, was another point; but
at present she could not doubt his having a decidedly warm admiration,
a conscious preference of herself; and this persuasion, joined to all
the rest, made her think that she _must_ be a little in love with him,
in spite of every previous determination against it. The visit
was returned in due form. John Dashwood’s card. Ferrars; but do you not perceive that my
interest on such an occasion would be perfectly unnecessary? “He could be still amiable, still pleasing to my uncle and aunt, when he
was in town; and why not to me? Mr. Cole once whispered to me—but I
immediately said, ‘No, Mr. Weston for her approbation of the plan. “No, no, no, it cannot be,” she cried; “she cannot feel. She used to be all
unreserve, and to you more especially.”

“I would not ask such a question for the world. “Jane, Jane, my dear Jane, where are you?—Here is your tippet. I consider it as one of the first
refinements of polished societies.”

“Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst
the less polished societies of the world: every savage can dance.”

Sir William only smiled. Emma wished to go to work
directly, and therefore produced the portfolio containing her various
attempts at portraits, for not one of them had ever been finished, that
they might decide together on the best size for Harriet. “Did she know?—had she heard any thing about
her, since their being at Randalls?—he felt much anxiety—he must
confess that the nature of her complaint alarmed him considerably.” And
in this style he talked on for some time very properly, not much
attending to any answer, but altogether sufficiently awake to the
terror of a bad sore throat; and Emma was quite in charity with him. She recalled her
past kindness—the kindness, the affection of sixteen years—how she had
taught and how she had played with her from five years old—how she had
devoted all her powers to attach and amuse her in health—and how nursed
her through the various illnesses of childhood. Mrs. “I will not say that I am disappointed, my dear sister,” said John, as
they were walking together one morning before the gates of Delaford
House, “_that_ would be saying too much, for certainly you have been
one of the most fortunate young women in the world, as it is. Knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article as
herself;—and two basins only were ordered. She
did not repent what she had done; she still thought herself a better
judge of such a point of female right and refinement than he could be;
but yet she had a sort of habitual respect for his judgment in general,
which made her dislike having it so loudly against her; and to have him
sitting just opposite to her in angry state, was very disagreeable. To be sure, your
brother and sister will ask you to come to them.”

“It will not be in my power to accept their invitation if they do.”

“How unlucky that is! She related the subjects
of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the
furniture in vain. “You may well be surprised,” continued Lucy; “for to be sure you could
have had no idea of it before; for I dare say he never dropped the
smallest hint of it to you or any of your family; because it was always
meant to be a great secret, and I am sure has been faithfully kept so
by me to this hour. Knightley and Harriet Smith!—Such an elevation on her
side! Yes,
I understand the sort of mind. “Yours sincerely,” etc. If _you_ have not been mistaken
here, _I_ must have been in an error. But that would be all over now.—Poor
fellow!—No more exploring parties to Donwell made for _her_. if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax!”

“Don’t class us together, Harriet. Suckling, it was not with Mrs. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out
of their sight? Bennet
was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present
fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and on the other,
retailing them all to the younger Miss Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice
rather louder than any other person’s, was enumerating the various
pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her. Her father, contented with laughing at
them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his
youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right
herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Mr. An old married man—quite good for
nothing. He must
have a pretty good opinion of himself.”

“I do not think he is conceited either, in general,” said Harriet, her
conscience opposing such censure; “at least, he is very good natured,
and I shall always feel much obliged to him, and have a great regard
for—but that is quite a different thing from—and you know, though he
may like me, it does not follow that I should—and certainly I must
confess that since my visiting here I have seen people—and if one comes
to compare them, person and manners, there is no comparison at all,
_one_ is so very handsome and agreeable. I acquit Edward of
essential misconduct. She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till
late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep, and
when it appeared to her rather right than pleasant that she should go
down stairs herself. I am sure I wonder my heart is not quite
broke.”

Here she took out her handkerchief; but Elinor did not feel very
compassionate. Elton, (feeling the indignity as a wife
ought to do,) “I cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you, of
all people in the world! Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn. Elton aside, and told her at once, that
upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs. He could number the
fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in
the most distant clump. “Oh! They, in their different homes, and their different ways,
might be looking back on it with pleasure; but in her view it was a
morning more completely misspent, more totally bare of rational
satisfaction at the time, and more to be abhorred in recollection, than
any she had ever passed. But you
have not an idea of what is requisite in situations directly opposite
to your own. Can you imagine any thing nearer perfect
beauty than Emma altogether—face and figure?”

“I do not know what I could imagine, but I confess that I have seldom
seen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers. Not a word passed
between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in the
happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. How did Miss Campbell appear to like it?”

“It was her very particular friend, you know.”

“Poor comfort!” said Emma, laughing. Jennings hear in the morning of what had passed. Happily it was not necessary
to speak. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go,
merely on that account; for in general, you know, they visit no new
comers. But while he was mortal,
there must be a triumph. She depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons for
supplying all the discipline of pointed neglect that could be farther
requisite.—Harriet rational, Frank Churchill not too much in love, and
Mr. It grieved her to see the earnestness with which
he often watched Marianne, and his spirits were certainly worse than
when at Barton. And how impossible in
others! I assured him that I could not. Knightley. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well
just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at
Meryton?”

“With great energy; but it is a subject which always makes a lady
energetic.”

“You are severe on us.”

“It will be _her_ turn soon to be teased,” said Miss Lucas. If Miss Woodhouse would not be displeased, she would
rather stay at home.” It was precisely what Emma would have wished, had
she deemed it possible enough for wishing. I have never told you how this was brought on. She suspected that it
_had_; that it would not have been so resolutely encountered but in
full expectation of hearing from some one very dear, and that it had
not been in vain. Mrs. Knightley. Two delightful twilight walks on the third and fourth evenings of her
being there, not merely on the dry gravel of the shrubbery, but all
over the grounds, and especially in the most distant parts of them,
where there was something more of wildness than in the rest, where the
trees were the oldest, and the grass was the longest and wettest,
had—assisted by the still greater imprudence of sitting in her wet
shoes and stockings—given Marianne a cold so violent as, though for a
day or two trifled with or denied, would force itself by increasing
ailments on the concern of every body, and the notice of herself. His pride, in that direction,
may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must deter
him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. “Are you ill, Miss Dashwood?—you seem low—you don’t speak;—sure you
an’t well.”

“I never was in better health.”

“I am glad of it with all my heart; but really you did not look it. Dashwood, not less watchful of what passed than her daughter, but
with a mind very differently influenced, and therefore watching to very
different effect, saw nothing in the Colonel’s behaviour but what arose
from the most simple and self-evident sensations, while in the actions
and words of Marianne she persuaded herself to think that something
more than gratitude already dawned. In this state of her spirits, a letter was delivered to her from the
post, which contained a proposal particularly well timed. With my
head and heart full of your sister, I was forced to play the happy
lover to another woman! Only look, sister, how delightful
every thing is! As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than
the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not
long enough to determine her feelings towards _one_ in that mansion; and
she lay awake two whole hours, endeavouring to make them out. I must
buy something at Ford’s. Cole was so kind
as to sit some time with us, talking of Jane; for as soon as she came
in, she began inquiring after her, Jane is so very great a favourite
there. Lady Catherine’s great attentions to Mrs. I have been expecting to hear
from you, and still more to see you, every hour of the day. In the
desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more; and,
turning to Elizabeth, said,--

“Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a
turn about the room. there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to South End. “Four years you have been engaged,” said she with a firm voice. I am not in the least
ashamed of my meaning.”

“But really, I am half ashamed, and wish I had never taken up the
idea.”

“I am very glad you did, and that you communicated it to me. For ten minutes she could hear nothing but herself. Dashwood’s strains were more solemn. He always speaks to the
purpose; open, straightforward, and very well judging. At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with
you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir William Lucas’s accidental
information, that Bingley’s attentions to your sister had given rise to
a general expectation of their marriage. But, upon my word, Mr. Gardiner thought of
him, and Mrs. how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in a
like manner. To enquire after Marianne was at first his
excuse; but the encouragement of his reception, to which every day gave
greater kindness, made such an excuse unnecessary before it had ceased
to be possible, by Marianne’s perfect recovery. I was reading it
to Mrs. how can you talk so? Oh! You had rather look out for misery for
Marianne, and guilt for poor Willoughby, than an apology for the
latter. Knightley did not make due
allowance for the influence of a strong passion at war with all
interested motives. There was no immediate appearance. I have heard him speak with great
animation of a large family of young ladies that his sisters are
intimate with, who have all twenty thousand pounds apiece.”

“I am very much obliged to you,” said Emma, laughing again. “_two_ thousand a year! “And they are really to be married!” cried Elizabeth, as soon as they
were by themselves. Now do not you feel that you had? Darcy. Elton’s side.—“I do
believe,” she continued, “this is the most troublesome parish that ever
was. Marianne was of no use on these occasions, as she would
never learn the game; but though her time was therefore at her own
disposal, the evening was by no means more productive of pleasure to
her than to Elinor, for it was spent in all the anxiety of expectation
and the pain of disappointment. is Fanny ill?”

“That is exactly what I said, my dear. But do you
always write such charming long letters to her, Mr. Bennet had no turn for economy; and her
husband’s love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their
income. Darcy. It will be taking out my freedom.—I dare say
they sell gloves.”

“Oh! Their being her relations too made it so much the
worse; and Mrs. But tomorrow I think I shall certainly be able to call in
Berkeley Street, and be introduced to your friend Mrs. I am really tired of exploring so long on one spot. Mrs. Jennings, that she thought it a delightful thing
for the girls to be together; and generally congratulated her young
friends every night, on having escaped the company of a stupid old
woman so long. Bingley for his kindness to
Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. “One can suppose nothing else,” added Mrs. I think I have heard you say that you know them.”

“I know them a little. Ferrars, by the simple expedient of
asking it, which, at Lucy’s instigation, was adopted. How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! What could your Ladyship propose by it?”

“At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.”

“Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family,” said Elizabeth
coolly, “will be rather a confirmation of it--if, indeed, such a report
is in existence.”

“If! You did not enjoy them
as I did; you appeared tired the whole time. “And what a charming little family they have! “Yes; and heaven knows how much longer we may have to wait. Respect would be added to affection. If it were love, it might be
simple, single, successless love on her side alone. Ferrars’s name by Miss Steele when alluded to, or even
openly mentioned by Sir John. Excellent dancing indeed!—Yes, my dear, I ran home, as I
said I should, to help grandmama to bed, and got back again, and nobody
missed me.—I set off without saying a word, just as I told you. A
ready-furnished house in a favourite spot was engaged, and much benefit
expected from the change. She was very feverish and had a bad sore throat:
Mrs. Palmer is
the kind of man I like.”




CHAPTER XXI. My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I
confess that I did not expect to receive _more_ than my due.”

“My object _then_,” replied Darcy, “was to show you, by every civility
in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped
to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you
see that your reproofs had been attended to. But does not Jane
correspond with his sister? The instrument was unlocked, every body prepared to be
charmed, and Marianne, who sang very well, at their request went
through the chief of the songs which Lady Middleton had brought into
the family on her marriage, and which perhaps had lain ever since in
the same position on the pianoforte, for her ladyship had celebrated
that event by giving up music, although by her mother’s account, she
had played extremely well, and by her own was very fond of it. His recollection of Harriet, and the words
which clothed it, the “beautiful little friend,” suggested to her the
idea of Harriet’s succeeding her in his affections. Men are very safe with
us, let them be ever so rich. Their claims to the notice of Mrs. She looked at her father to entreat his
interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. Here am I come down for
only one day, and you are engaged with a dinner-party!—When did it
happen before, or any thing like it? Weston was
a man of unexceptionable character, easy fortune, suitable age, and
pleasant manners; and there was some satisfaction in considering with
what self-denying, generous friendship she had always wished and
promoted the match; but it was a black morning’s work for her. Harriet really wished,
and had wished some time, to consult a dentist. Jennings was quite right in what she
said. The contrast between Mrs. “Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St. Within a few days after this meeting, the newspapers announced to the
world, that the lady of Thomas Palmer, Esq. However this morning he came just as we came home from church; and then
it all came out, how he had been sent for Wednesday to Harley Street,
and been talked to by his mother and all of them, and how he had
declared before them all that he loved nobody but Lucy, and nobody but
Lucy would he have. Bless me! She knew not that she had been the means of sending the owners of
Cleveland away, in about seven days from the time of their arrival. Mr. _Your_
competence and _my_ wealth are very much alike, I dare say; and without
them, as the world goes now, we shall both agree that every kind of
external comfort must be wanting. If it can be contrived to be at
the Crown, papa, it will be very convenient for the horses. But Marianne, in
her place, would not have done so little. [Illustration]

Elizabeth, when Mr. Elton is a most worthy young man—but’—In
short, I do not think I am particularly quick at those sort of
discoveries. Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her
brain; but she was satisfied with none. Weston.”

But hardly had she so spoken, when she found her brother was civilly
offering a seat in his carriage, if the weather were Mr. My courage
rises while I write. Mrs. _You_ do not often overpower me with it.”

“You are expecting her again, you say, this morning?”

“Almost every moment. Her three notes,—unluckily they were
all in my pocketbook, or I should have denied their existence, and
hoarded them for ever,—I was forced to put them up, and could not even
kiss them. Do you mean with regard to this
letter?”

“Yes.”

“But what are you in doubt of? Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing
how _she_, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its
acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. I offered immediately, as soon as my mother
related the affair to me, to talk to him myself, and dissuade him from
the match; but it was too late _then_, I found, to do any thing, for
unluckily, I was not in the way at first, and knew nothing of it till
after the breach had taken place, when it was not for me, you know, to
interfere. Weston’s
wedding-day; but Mr. Yet, though smiling
within herself at the mistake, she honoured her sister for that blind
partiality to Edward which produced it. Oh! CHAPTER VII. Hurst, merely
looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Weston
had very good reason for saying so. Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her sister’s sensibility; but
by Mrs. dear, how beautiful these are! It was not the
first time of her feeling the same kind of conviction; for, more than
once before, beginning with the observation of “your sister looks
unwell to-day,” or “your sister seems out of spirits,” he had appeared
on the point, either of disclosing, or of inquiring, something
particular about her. I am sure I shan’t get a wink of sleep all night. This letter, however, was written, and sealed, and sent. It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; you
would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. Cole was telling that
she had been calling on Miss Bates, and as soon as she entered the room
had been struck by the sight of a pianoforte—a very elegant looking
instrument—not a grand, but a large-sized square pianoforte; and the
substance of the story, the end of all the dialogue which ensued of
surprize, and inquiry, and congratulations on her side, and
explanations on Miss Bates’s, was, that this pianoforte had arrived
from Broadwood’s the day before, to the great astonishment of both aunt
and niece—entirely unexpected; that at first, by Miss Bates’s account,
Jane herself was quite at a loss, quite bewildered to think who could
possibly have ordered it—but now, they were both perfectly satisfied
that it could be from only one quarter;—of course it must be from
Colonel Campbell. Elton had received
notice of it that morning, and was in raptures. She merely observed that he was perfectly
good humoured and friendly. She would not even admit it to have been natural; and
Elinor left her to be convinced that it was so, by that which only
could convince her, a better knowledge of mankind. Her house will
therefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it.”

“That is a material consideration undoubtedly. [Illustration]

Elizabeth’s impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could no
longer be overcome; and at length resolving to suppress every particular
in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be surprised,
she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between Mr. But do not imagine that I
want to influence you.”

“Oh! She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her
chance of pleasure for the evening must depend. no—I would get you a better partner than myself. Had Mrs. “Did it,” said he,--“did it _soon_ make you
think better of me? Whatever your business may be
with me, it will be better recollected and explained to-morrow.”

“I understand you,” he replied, with an expressive smile, and a voice
perfectly calm; “yes, I am very drunk. I was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride
and conceit. I could
not have visited Mrs. That will be a much better thing. Ferrars two or
three times in Harley Street, and am much pleased with him. She
even proceeded so far as to be concerned to find that Elinor and her
sister were so soon to leave town, as she had hoped to see more of
them;—an exertion in which her husband, who attended her into the room,
and hung enamoured over her accents, seemed to distinguish every thing
that was most affectionate and graceful. Ferrars and your sister were both so good to say
more than once, they should always be glad to see me. But mama did not think the match good
enough for me, otherwise Sir John would have mentioned it to the
Colonel, and we should have been married immediately.”

“Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John’s proposal to your mother
before it was made? You
would have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this little
unwillingness; but allow me to assure you that I have your respected
mother’s permission for this address. Woodhouse’s observation. It was not possible that the occurrence
should not be strongly recommending each to the other. It was now above a week since John Dashwood had called in Berkeley
Street, and as since that time no notice had been taken by them of his
wife’s indisposition, beyond one verbal enquiry, Elinor began to feel
it necessary to pay her a visit.—This was an obligation, however, which
not only opposed her own inclination, but which had not the assistance
of any encouragement from her companions. Oh, no! But consider—you need not be afraid
of delegating power to _me_. She resolved to prevail on her to
spend a day at Hartfield. those dear
little children. Mr. But now, after such dishonorable usage, who can tell what
were his designs on her. They spoke, therefore, of Mrs. Darcy chose to doubt it--or to treat it as a merely
conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim
to it by extravagance, imprudence, in short, anything or nothing. Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even
inferior to what Elizabeth felt. Nothing can be like it, to be sure! But so it was. I mean never
to be later in rising than six, and from that time till dinner I shall
divide every moment between music and reading. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought
only of _you_.”

Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. Selina says it is quite horror to her—and I believe I have
caught a little of her nicety. One morning, about a week after his leaving the country, Marianne was
prevailed on to join her sisters in their usual walk, instead of
wandering away by herself. But, gracious me! I shall go distracted.”

This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted; and
Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself,
soon went away. How long had Mr. Bingley’s name had been last mentioned
between them; and if she might judge from his complexion, _his_ mind was
not very differently engaged. In such a situation as that, where there seemed
nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any living creature, how
could I suppose, when she so earnestly, so warmly insisted on sharing
my fate, whatever it might be, that any thing but the most
disinterested affection was her inducement? For some weeks past she had been
spending more than half her time there, and gradually getting to have a
bed-room appropriated to herself; and Emma judged it best in every
respect, safest and kindest, to keep her with them as much as possible
just at present. Lodging as I did in
Bond Street, there was hardly a day in which I did not catch a glimpse
of one or other of you; and nothing but the most constant watchfulness
on my side, a most invariably prevailing desire to keep out of your
sight, could have separated us so long. I am not so selfish,
however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. The
visit was of course short; and there was so much embarrassment and
occupation of mind to shorten it, that Emma would not allow herself
entirely to form an opinion of the lady, and on no account to give one,
beyond the nothing-meaning terms of being “elegantly dressed, and very
pleasing.”

She did not really like her. “Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said; for her
thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared
by her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Her observation had been pretty correct. I dare say Miss Nash would envy you such an
opportunity as this of being married. There is a lady, it seems, a
     Mrs. And now I can see
it in no other light than as an offering of love.”

There was no occasion to press the matter farther. Her looks and
words had nothing to restrain them. But _I_
require no such proof. Brighton and a whole
campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor
regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!”

“Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia, as they sat down to
table. She plays and sings all day long. She is unfortunately of a sickly
constitution, which has prevented her making that progress in many
accomplishments which she could not otherwise have failed of, as I am
informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still
resides with them. It was rather too late in the day to set about being simple-minded and
ignorant; but she left her with every previous resolution confirmed of
being humble and discreet, and repressing imagination all the rest of
her life. There has been a
solemn engagement between them ever since October—formed at Weymouth,
and kept a secret from every body. Her
brother’s recommendation was enough to insure her favour: his judgment
could not err; and he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth, as to leave
Georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and
amiable. Otway, and Miss Otway and Miss
Caroline.—Such a host of friends!—and Mr. Darcy speaking to her.”

“Ay, because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
could not help answering her; but she said he seemed very angry at being
spoke to.”

“Miss Bingley told me,” said Jane, “that he never speaks much unless
among his intimate acquaintance. She cared for none
     of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear of
     leaving Wickham. At
least, however, I cannot be worse off than I should have been, if the
other had been the person; and now—it _is_ possible—”

She paused a few moments. This woman of
whom he writes—whoever she be—or any one, in short, but your own dear
self, mama, and Edward, may have been so barbarous to bely me. Elizabeth was ready
to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between
Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in
listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all
the dinnertime. But I am a partial
old friend.”

“Such an eye!—the true hazle eye—and so brilliant! Elton,” replied Jane, “I dare say I shall be
interested—but I believe it requires _that_ with me. Elton’s being to stoop in marrying her, than she now seemed of Mr. She owned that, considering every thing, she was not absolutely without
inclination for the party. Where I have a regard, I
always think a person well-looking. “Are you quite sure of it?” she replied. [Illustration:

     “To make herself agreeable to all”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and oh! “Aye, aye, the parsonage is but a small one,” said she, after the first
ebullition of surprise and satisfaction was over, “and very likely
_may_ be out of repair; but to hear a man apologising, as I thought,
for a house that to my knowledge has five sitting rooms on the
ground-floor, and I think the housekeeper told me could make up fifteen
beds! Depend upon it, that was the case: and very likely
to happen with the Donwell servants, who are all, I have often
observed, extremely awkward and remiss.—I am sure I would not have such
a creature as his Harry stand at our sideboard for any consideration. Gilbert does not mean to dance, but there is a young lady
disengaged whom I should be very glad to see dancing—Miss Smith.” “Miss
Smith!—oh!—I had not observed.—You are extremely obliging—and if I were
not an old married man.—But my dancing days are over, Mrs. She put down the
letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be
impartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but with
little success. For once in your life
you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken. And as I looked at her, though I never saw
her appear to more advantage, it struck me that she was heated, and
would therefore be particularly liable to take cold. What a disappointment it would be! Weston, with a look of gentle reproach—“Ah! How much worse, had they been obliged to meet! Mrs. I
would be understood to mean, that it can be only weak, irresolute
characters, (whose happiness must be always at the mercy of chance,)
who will suffer an unfortunate acquaintance to be an inconvenience, an
oppression for ever.”

He made no answer; merely looked, and bowed in submission; and soon
afterwards said, in a lively tone,

“Well, I have so little confidence in my own judgment, that whenever I
marry, I hope some body will chuse my wife for me. Dashwood do? She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach,
received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be
overcome. I am a great dreamer. When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr. “Insufferable woman!” was her immediate exclamation. Goddard will want to see it.—And I could take the pattern gown
home any day. Do put up your horse at the Crown, and come in.”

“Well,” said he, in a deliberating manner, “for five minutes, perhaps.”

“And here is Mrs. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. But it should be so no more. On this subject I have
nothing more to say, no other apology to offer. I should like to
see two more here,—your pretty little friend, Miss Smith, and my
son—and then I should say we were quite complete. She was teased by
Mr. Mr. As to there being any quantity of snow fallen or likely
to fall to impede their return, that was a mere joke; he was afraid
they would find no difficulty. “If not in our dispositions,” she presently added, with a look of true
sensibility, “there is a likeness in our destiny; the destiny which
bids fair to connect us with two characters so much superior to our
own.”

“True, true,” he answered, warmly. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor
mother. “Yes,” said he, “they were married last week, and are now at Dawlish.”

Elinor could sit it no longer. But you know married women have never much time for
writing. Let us hope, therefore, that her being
there may teach her her own insignificance. The very first
sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for
the winter, and concluded with her brother’s regret at not having had
time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left
the country. Mary and Kitty, thank
Heaven! To be sure it was pitiable enough; but upon my soul, I
believe he has as good a heart as any in the kingdom; and I declare and
protest to you I never was so shocked in my life, as when it all burst
forth. She
considered—resolved—and, trying to smile, began—

“You have some news to hear, now you are come back, that will rather
surprize you.”

“Have I?” said he quietly, and looking at her; “of what nature?”

“Oh! Weston. “It was certainly never brilliant, but she would
not allow it to have a sickly hue in general; and there was a softness
and delicacy in her skin which gave peculiar elegance to the character
of her face.” He listened with all due deference; acknowledged that he
had heard many people say the same—but yet he must confess, that to him
nothing could make amends for the want of the fine glow of health. Mr. There is no knowing how estates
will go when once they come to be entailed.”

“I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and
could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing
forward and precipitate. Bennet this morning, that if you ever resolved on quitting Netherfield
you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of
panegyric, of compliment to yourself; and yet what is there so very
laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business
undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?”

“Nay,” cried Bingley, “this is too much, to remember at night all the
foolish things that were said in the morning. Elton’s voice from the sitting-room had not checked her,
and made it expedient to compress all her friendly and all her
congratulatory sensations into a very, very earnest shake of the hand. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins,
from a conviction that, if they saw him depart, they could not fail to
conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known
till its success could be known likewise; for, though feeling almost
secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,
he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday. So upon
that, he smirked, and simpered, and looked grave, and seemed to know
something or other, and at last he said in a whisper, ‘For fear any
unpleasant report should reach the young ladies under your care as to
their sister’s indisposition, I think it advisable to say, that I
believe there is no great reason for alarm; I hope Mrs. It is so ridiculous!”

This was quite a new idea to Mrs. I dare not let my mother know how little she
eats—so I say one thing and then I say another, and it passes off. Mr. united, what reverse we have! Oh, God! She bitterly regretted
not having sought a closer acquaintance with her, and blushed for the
envious feelings which had certainly been, in some measure, the cause. Bingley was incomprehensible. Considering how very handsome
she is, she appears to be little occupied with it; her vanity lies
another way. Mr. I
would not have you too sanguine; though, however it may end, be assured
your raising your thoughts to _him_, is a mark of good taste which I
shall always know how to value.”

Harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive gratitude. Weston in a trembling voice. Darcy has not authorized me to
make his communication public. “And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own
credit; but I am an idle fellow; and though I have not many, I have more
than I ever looked into.”

Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those
in the room. Miss Bennet’s astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly
partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly
natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. Bennet, for many years after Lydia’s birth, had been certain that he
would. Her mother would
talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Cole, you would stay a
little longer than you might wish. Darcy gave him a
voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it
to be as much a debt of gratitude to _him_ as of affection to myself.”

“How strange!” cried Elizabeth. The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable comfort to
themselves. Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days. Let me know everything that I am to know without delay. The tone implied some old acquaintance—and
how could she possibly guess? Surely you
must be mistaken. Jennings from
seeing her sister’s thoughts as clearly as she did, “I dare say we
shall have Sir John and Lady Middleton in town by the end of next
week.”

“Ay, my dear, I’ll warrant you we do. Two ladies
were waiting for their carriage, and one of them was giving the other
an account of the intended match, in a voice so little attempting
concealment, that it was impossible for me not to hear all. That she was, to all appearance, in the
last stage of a consumption, was—yes, in such a situation it was my
greatest comfort. Ellison could
never agree.”

“And who are the Ellisons?”

“Her guardians, my dear. Come, and eat my strawberries. I see the difference plain enough. Well, by-and-by we shall have a
few friends, and that will amuse her a little. “I have some hope,” resumed he, “of my uncle’s being persuaded to pay a
visit at Randalls; he wants to be introduced to her. Hitherto she had carefully avoided every
companion in her rambles. She is upstairs, and will have great satisfaction in seeing you
all. So then, I try to put it out of her thoughts, and
say, Come ma’am, do not let us think about it any more.”

“Her friends must all be sorry to lose her; and will not Colonel and
Mrs. Mrs. “There is a gentleman with him, mamma,” said Kitty; “who can it be?”

“Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not
know.”

“La!” replied Kitty, “it looks just like that man that used to be with
him before. He repeated the inquiry with yet greater
eagerness. Philips’s supper party, but his manners recommended him to
everybody. And then when we came away it was such fun! Darcy was almost as far from her as the table
could divide them. What would you
advise me to do? Marianne restored to life, health,
friends, and to her doting mother, was an idea to fill her heart with
sensations of exquisite comfort, and expand it in fervent
gratitude;—but it led to no outward demonstrations of joy, no words, no
smiles. To be
sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed, I rather believe he
_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something
about Mr. I acknowledge that her situation and her
character ought to have been respected by me. It did her no service however. here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave with us;
thank you for the sight of it. But however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed
his determination, I do not suppose that it would ultimately have
prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded by the assurance, which
I hesitated not in giving, of your sister’s indifference. “But I can assure you,” she added, “that Lizzy does not lose much by not
suiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at
all worth pleasing. They had been meeting almost every day since his
arrival. Dixon’s choice. It is really too distressing, I am sure you must
feel it so.”

“Oh no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full
of both. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking
to anybody. When they had been all walking
together, he had so often come and walked by her, and talked so very
delightfully!—He seemed to want to be acquainted with her. I could not stay two minutes. Mr. It is of all subjects my delight. Bennet was quite in the fidgets. Wholly inattentive to her sister’s feelings, Lydia flew
about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone’s
congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever;
whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at her fate
in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish. Such a scoundrel of
a fellow! Every door was now
closed, the passage plan given up, and the first scheme of dancing only
in the room they were in resorted to again; and with such good-will on
Frank Churchill’s part, that the space which a quarter of an hour
before had been deemed barely sufficient for five couple, was now
endeavoured to be made out quite enough for ten. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only
wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern
at parting with her that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer
of the chaise into an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the
present. Ferrars?”

Elinor _did_ think the question a very odd one, and her countenance
expressed it, as she answered that she had never seen Mrs. The whole country about them abounded in beautiful walks. Kitty then owned, with a very natural
triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia’s last letter
she had prepared her for such a step. CHAPTER IX


Emma’s pensive meditations, as she walked home, were not interrupted;
but on entering the parlour, she found those who must rouse her. The very last person whom one should expect to
be forgotten!—My dear Mr. It was an advantage that could not be too
gratefully acknowledged, nor too speedily made use of; and the visit to
Lady Middleton, which had not before had any precise limits, was
instantly discovered to have been always meant to end in two days’
time. So
very good of them to send her the whole way! When I am quite determined as to the time, I am not at all afraid of
being long unemployed. I always pity them when they do; they seem to
take it so much to heart.”

“That is true,” cried Marianne, in a cheerful voice, and walking to the
window as she spoke, to examine the day. Darcy afterwards discharged. Who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine
there (an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so
immediately after your arrival?”

“I am the less surprised at what has happened,” replied Sir William,
“from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which
my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with
much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the
end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by
Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who with
some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in
dancing at one end of the room. Their journey was safely performed. Churchill! Jennings’s happiness, produced a
temporary alteration in the disposal of her time, and influenced, in a
like degree, the engagements of her young friends; for as she wished to
be as much as possible with Charlotte, she went thither every morning
as soon as she was dressed, and did not return till late in the
evening; and the Miss Dashwoods, at the particular request of the
Middletons, spent the whole of every day in Conduit Street. You must not disappoint your father.”

“My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.”

“Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.”

“Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. But the feelings which made such composure a
disgrace, left her in no danger of incurring it. E., you are a thorough humourist.—Yes,
believe me, Knightley, I am fully sensible of your attention to me in
the whole of this scheme. But the day did not close so auspiciously as it began. His most particular
friend, you see by Jane’s account, was persuaded of his never intending
to marry her. “Happy
couple!” said Frank Churchill, as soon as they were out of
hearing:—“How well they suit one another!—Very lucky—marrying as they
did, upon an acquaintance formed only in a public place!—They only knew
each other, I think, a few weeks in Bath! Emma and Harriet were going to walk; he
joined them; and, on returning, they fell in with a larger party, who,
like themselves, judged it wisest to take their exercise early, as the
weather threatened rain; Mr. Then passing through the garden, the gate of
which had been left open by Margaret, he bore her directly into the
house, whither Margaret was just arrived, and quitted not his hold till
he had seated her in a chair in the parlour. Their taste was strikingly
alike. But Marianne abhorred all
concealment where no real disgrace could attend unreserve; and to aim
at the restraint of sentiments which were not in themselves illaudable,
appeared to her not merely an unnecessary effort, but a disgraceful
subjection of reason to common-place and mistaken notions. poor man! I shall not go away till you have given me the
assurance I require.”

“And I certainly _never_ shall give it. You cannot go to town till tomorrow, Brandon, that is all.”

“I wish it could be so easily settled. She was not struck by any thing remarkably clever in Miss Smith’s
conversation, but she found her altogether very engaging—not
inconveniently shy, not unwilling to talk—and yet so far from pushing,
shewing so proper and becoming a deference, seeming so pleasantly
grateful for being admitted to Hartfield, and so artlessly impressed by
the appearance of every thing in so superior a style to what she had
been used to, that she must have good sense, and deserve encouragement. He then asked her to walk into the house--but she declared herself not
tired, and they stood together on the lawn. I thought you would, he is so pleasant; and
Mr. Churchill had
sent his nephew a few lines, containing, upon the whole, a tolerable
account of Mrs. An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dashwoods of debating on the
rest of the children, as Sir John would not leave the house without
securing their promise of dining at the park the next day. no”—and Emma could
just catch the words, “so superior to Mr. But I will not
suppose this possible, and I hope very soon to receive your personal
assurance of its being otherwise. Darcy is
impatient to see his sister; and to confess the truth, _we_ are scarcely
less eager to meet her again. One other short call in Harley Street, in which Elinor received her
brother’s congratulations on their travelling so far towards Barton
without any expense, and on Colonel Brandon’s being to follow them to
Cleveland in a day or two, completed the intercourse of the brother and
sisters in town;—and a faint invitation from Fanny, to come to Norland
whenever it should happen to be in their way, which of all things was
the most unlikely to occur, with a more warm, though less public,
assurance, from John to Elinor, of the promptitude with which he should
come to see her at Delaford, was all that foretold any meeting in the
country. “If I had been able,” said she, “to carry my point in going to Brighton
with all my family, _this_ would not have happened: but poor dear Lydia
had nobody to take care of her. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed
how really happy he was. I shall never reflect on my former acquaintance with
    your family in Devonshire without the most grateful pleasure, and
    flatter myself it will not be broken by any mistake or
    misapprehension of my actions. My situation in life, my
connections with the family of De Bourgh, and my relationship to your
own, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into
further consideration that, in spite of your manifold attractions, it is
by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you. Bingley on the subject of the
ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be
the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. it cannot be. Knightley meant to marry; by which means Hartfield would receive the
constant addition of that person’s company whom she knew he loved, next
to his daughters and Mrs. She was sensible of all
the affection it evinced. Elizabeth received her
congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took
refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom. Jennings were first calling on her in Harley Street, another
of her acquaintance had dropt in—a circumstance in itself not
apparently likely to produce evil to her. The whole of what Elizabeth had already
heard, his claims on Mr. CHAPTER VIII


Harriet slept at Hartfield that night. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly: her
features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very
little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. It was
a pity, perhaps, that he had not come last night; for, though the child
seemed well now, very well considering, it would probably have been
better if Perry had seen it.”

Frank Churchill caught the name. In Edward’s farewell there was no
distinction between Elinor and me: it was the good wishes of an
affectionate brother to both. “But indeed you must and shall come. All this was acknowledged to Mrs. (with some
elevation) I was thinking of a much more precious circumstance—of Mr. Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of
raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her
opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend’s dislike would
vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power. You will have much pleasure in being in London, and
especially in being together; and if Elinor would ever condescend to
anticipate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety of
sources; she would, perhaps, expect some from improving her
acquaintance with her sister-in-law’s family.”

Elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempting to weaken her
mother’s dependence on the attachment of Edward and herself, that the
shock might be less when the whole truth were revealed, and now on this
attack, though almost hopeless of success, she forced herself to begin
her design by saying, as calmly as she could, “I like Edward Ferrars
very much, and shall always be glad to see him; but as to the rest of
the family, it is a matter of perfect indifference to me, whether I am
ever known to them or not.”

Mrs. How do you like
them?”

“Hush! “Elegant, agreeable manners, I was prepared for,” said he; “but I
confess that, considering every thing, I had not expected more than a
very tolerably well-looking woman of a certain age; I did not know that
I was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs. “A gamester!” she cried. “How good it was in you, my dear Mr. They arrived, the carriage turned, the step was let down, and Mr. The
quietness of the game made it particularly eligible for Mr. Will not it be
beautiful in her dark hair?”

“Very beautiful, indeed,” replied Emma; and she spoke so kindly, that
he gratefully burst out,

“How delighted I am to see you again! Darcy;--but let me not interrupt you, sir. “Well, well, and so Mr. He declares he won’t. He is very little at Combe, I
believe; but if he were ever so much there, I do not think Mr. Her indignation would have been still stronger
than it was, had she not witnessed that embarrassment which seemed to
speak a consciousness of his own misconduct, and prevented her from
believing him so unprincipled as to have been sporting with the
affections of her sister from the first, without any design that would
bear investigation. Ferrars has suffered from his family; for if I understand
the matter right, he has been entirely cast off by them for persevering
in his engagement with a very deserving young woman. The two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very late dinner, affording
a pleasant enlargement of the party, and a very welcome variety to
their conversation, which a long morning of the same continued rain had
reduced very low. In
terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though
expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect
approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the
engagements that had been made for him. She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of
Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. Ten couple, in either of the
Randalls rooms, would have been insufferable!—Dreadful!—I felt how
right you were the whole time, but was too anxious for securing _any_
_thing_ to like to yield. Indeed you should take care of
yourself as well as of your friend. Is there nothing you could take to give you
present relief? The wants and sufferings of the poor family, however, were the
first subject on meeting. The picture which she had then drawn of the privations of the
approaching winter, had proved erroneous; no friends had deserted them,
no pleasures had been lost.—But her present forebodings she feared
would experience no similar contradiction. Elton was very much discomposed
indeed.—“Poor Knightley! She was
evidently displeased; looked up, and seeing herself watched, blushed
more deeply than he had ever perceived her, and saying only, “I did not
know that proper names were allowed,” pushed away the letters with even
an angry spirit, and looked resolved to be engaged by no other word
that could be offered. Weston, smiling, “that I thought so
_then_;—but since we have parted, I can never remember Emma’s omitting
to do any thing I wished.”

“There is hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory as _that_,”—said
Mr. He is undoubtedly a sensible man, and in his manners perfectly
the gentleman.”

“Indeed,” replied Elinor, “I believe that you will find him, on farther
acquaintance, all that you have heard him to be, and as you will be
such very near neighbours (for I understand the parsonage is almost
close to the mansion-house,) it is particularly important that he
_should_ be all this.”

Edward made no answer; but when she had turned away her head, gave her
a look so serious, so earnest, so uncheerful, as seemed to say, that he
might hereafter wish the distance between the parsonage and the
mansion-house much greater. Though you do not know him so well as
me, Miss Dashwood, you must have seen enough of him to be sensible he
is very capable of making a woman sincerely attached to him.”

“Certainly,” answered Elinor, without knowing what she said; but after
a moment’s reflection, she added, with revived security of Edward’s
honour and love, and her companion’s falsehood—“Engaged to Mr. Your mother insists upon your
accepting it. And his person, his manners too, are all in his
favour. Elton swelled at the idea of Miss Woodhouse’s presiding; Mr. On the present occasion, for the better entertainment of their visitor,
towards whose amusement he felt himself bound to contribute, he wished
to engage them for both. “He is perfectly well-behaved, polite, and unassuming,” said her uncle. Have you,” she
continued, after a short silence, “ever seen Mr. Ay, it is a fine thing to be young and
handsome. I should not wonder if it were to bring on the
declaration. He is desperately in love and
means to marry her.”

“He is very obliging,” said Emma; “but is he sure that Harriet means to
marry him?”

“Well, well, means to make her an offer then. Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” and
then, with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon
out of sight. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you
deserve.”

Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back
the praise on her sister’s warm affection. Don’t let them make _you_
unhappy.”

She could say no more; her spirits were quite overcome, and hiding her
face on Elinor’s shoulder, she burst into tears. Bennet, “you
will wait on him, of course.”

“No, no. oh! But have you likewise heard that Miss Grey has fifty thousand
pounds? She has two nieces
of her own. Woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh reflections on his
friend Perry, to whom he had, in fact, though unconsciously, been
attributing many of his own feelings and expressions;—but the soothing
attentions of his daughters gradually removed the present evil, and the
immediate alertness of one brother, and better recollections of the
other, prevented any renewal of it. The event had every promise of happiness for her friend. Are you in any
doubt as to that? “What do you mean, Mr. You tell me that she has forgiven me already. No! She will be disagreeable in
infancy, and correct herself as she grows older. Mr. Day after
day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the
report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to
Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs. “I was wrong,” he continued, “in talking of its being _broke_ to you. Knightley soon saw that he had lost his moment, and that
not another syllable of communication could rest with him. You will stay, and go with us?”

“No, certainly not; I shall go home in the cool of the evening.”

“But you may come again in the cool of to-morrow morning.”

“No—It will not be worth while. Perry! “These matters are always
a secret, till it is found out that every body knows them. I could hardly keep my seat. As for Mr. Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could
find no interval of ease or forgetfulness. The impertinence of the Eltons, which for a few
minutes had threatened to ruin the rest of her evening, had been the
occasion of some of its highest satisfactions; and she looked forward
to another happy result—the cure of Harriet’s infatuation.—From
Harriet’s manner of speaking of the circumstance before they quitted
the ballroom, she had strong hopes. Ferrars, a very good-natured woman, I am sure it would give her
great pleasure; she said as much the other day.”

Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer. Poor Charlotte! She wanted to talk, but
there seemed an embargo on every subject. When the time proposed drew near,
Mrs. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it as you
used to do.”

“And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike
to him, without any reason. Woodhouse. No,
he could not believe it a bad house; not such a house as a man was to
be pitied for having. Mrs. She was on the point of sending again for Mr. His diffidence had
prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but
his reliance on mine made everything easy. There was no getting
at her real opinion. As they were turning into the grounds, Mr. He took leave
of his relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished
his fair cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father
another letter of thanks. Jennings (as she had of late often hoped might be the
case) had ceased to imagine her at all attached to Edward; and happy
above all the rest, in the absence of Marianne, she felt very well able
to speak of the affair without embarrassment, and to give her judgment,
as she believed, with impartiality on the conduct of every one
concerned in it. She could now look forward to giving him
that full and perfect confidence which her disposition was most ready
to welcome as a duty. Her reflections were in general satisfactory. But there were other causes of repugnance; causes
which, though still existing, and existing to an equal degree in both
instances, I had myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not
immediately before me. Elton
gone on foot to Donwell?—He will have a hot walk.”

“Oh! have you met him to—”

“I could meet him no other way. “But if you write a note to the housekeeper, Mr. “A fortnight!” she repeated, surprised at his being so long in the same
county with Elinor without seeing her before. I wanted to know a
little more, and this tells me quite enough. Why was it necessary to call?”

“It was necessary to my own pride. One’s fortune, as your
mother justly says, is _not_ one’s own. “Well, sir,” said Mrs. Very happy to hear
it. leave all that to me. This is in the supposition of his attachment continuing what it
now is; but I do not know that I expect it will; I do not look upon him
to be quite the sort of man—I do not altogether build upon his
steadiness or constancy.—His feelings are warm, but I can imagine them
rather changeable.—Every consideration of the subject, in short, makes
me thankful that my happiness is not more deeply involved.—I shall do
very well again after a little while—and then, it will be a good thing
over; for they say every body is in love once in their lives, and I
shall have been let off easily.”

When his letter to Mrs. His importance at Enscombe was very evident. He lived
about a mile from Highbury, was a frequent visitor, and always welcome,
and at this time more welcome than usual, as coming directly from their
mutual connexions in London. They attempted, therefore,
likewise, to excuse themselves; the weather was uncertain, and not
likely to be good. The envelope contained a
sheet of elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady’s
fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister’s countenance change as
she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages. And not a creature knowing a
syllable of the matter, except Nancy! Gardiner’s coming up they were all pressed to go into
the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they
parted on each side with the utmost politeness. After a pause of wonder, she exclaimed—

“Four months!—Have you known of this four months?”

Elinor confirmed it. And is
_such_ a girl to be my nephew’s sister? To find
a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! We have judged it best that my
     niece should be married from this house, of which I hope you will
     approve. Margaret related something to her the next day, which placed this
matter in a still clearer light. We will not despair, however. When they repaired to the
dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take
the place which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by
her sister. While
she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy with a heightened
complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with
confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. What! It rained dreadfully hard for half an hour while we were at
breakfast. Elton, very well indeed. Real, long-standing regard brought the Westons and Mr. Knightley for them all to give way to!—No—Mr. Every body pretends to feel and tries to
describe with the taste and elegance of him who first defined what
picturesque beauty was. Miss Woodhouse, what do you think has happened!” which instantly burst
forth, had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation. What I said just
now, meant nothing. Weston,
you and I must be cautious how we express ourselves. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.”

Mr. “Oh, la! Long. It is natural, and it is honourable.—Yes,
honourable, I think, to chuse so well and so gratefully.—But that it
will be a fortunate preference is more than I can promise. It was a happy circumstance, and animated Mr. Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been
well assured of his cousin’s corroboration. Elton will lose no time in calling on him; and we shall both have great
pleasure in seeing him at the Vicarage.”

“You are very obliging.—Frank will be extremely happy, I am sure.— He
is to be in town next week, if not sooner. Weston?—To Bath, or to
Clifton?” “She has taken it into her head that Enscombe is too cold for
her. But why must
she consent to be with the Eltons?—Here is quite a separate puzzle.”

Upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of the subject, before
the few who knew her opinion of Mrs. Perry could not quite understand him, but he was very
sure there must be a _lady_ in the case, and he told him so; and Mr. Dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantly quitted the
parlour to give way in solitude to the concern and alarm which this
sudden departure occasioned. Nor could she leave the place in which
Willoughby remained, busy in new engagements, and new schemes, in which
_she_ could have no share, without shedding many tears. Clarke.”

It was lucky, however, for Mrs. She hardly knew
what to say. I do assure you that you owe it entirely,
at least almost entirely, to your own merit, and Colonel Brandon’s
discernment of it. In a few minutes, however, Marianne was recovered enough to put an end
to the bustle, and sit down among the rest; though her spirits retained
the impression of what had passed, the whole evening. Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?”

“Yes; but when questioned by _him_, Denny denied knowing anything of
their plan, and would not give his real opinion about it. “My dear, dear Lydia!” she cried: “this is delightful indeed! “I will leave you,” said Elinor, “if you will go to bed.” But this,
from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering, she at first
refused to do. You
are a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to be spared to
Abbey-Mill.”

“And I am sure I should never want to go there; for I am never happy
but at Hartfield.”

Some time afterwards it was, “I think Mrs. But they learnt, on enquiry, that its
possessor, an elderly lady of very good character, was unfortunately
too infirm to mix with the world, and never stirred from home. It was a fortnight since Mrs. Campbell were very particular about
their daughter’s not walking out often with only Mr. I was right, therefore; my last letter had never reached her. I shall
pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any
better.”

And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect
unconcern, “Oh, but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and
when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I
think it will be very tolerable. He
     dined with us the next day, and was to leave town again on
     Wednesday or Thursday. He paid her only the
compliment of attention; and she felt a respect for him on the
occasion, which the others had reasonably forfeited by their shameless
want of taste. This will never do.”

“You need not distress yourself. He took the hint and soon began with, “This seems a very comfortable
house. Bingley by a housemaid,
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his
sisters. They had too much sense to be desirable companions to the former; and
by the latter they were considered with a jealous eye, as intruding on
_their_ ground, and sharing the kindness which they wanted to
monopolize. Because they neither flattered herself nor her children, she could not
believe them good-natured; and because they were fond of reading, she
fancied them satirical: perhaps without exactly knowing what it was to
be satirical; but _that_ did not signify. Mrs. Mrs. It was a good scheme; but on driving to the door they heard that
neither “master nor mistress was at home;” they had both been out some
time; the man believed they were gone to Hartfield. I did not see you before. With
men he can be rational and unaffected, but when he has ladies to
please, every feature works.”

“Mr. Goddard had ever
seen. So seldom that a
letter, among the thousands that are constantly passing about the
kingdom, is even carried wrong—and not one in a million, I suppose,
actually lost! I came to inquire, but I was convinced before I
could ask the question. Her thoughts were instantly
driven back to the time when Mr. I doubted it
more the next day on Box Hill; when, provoked by such conduct on my
side, such shameful, insolent neglect of her, and such apparent
devotion to Miss W., as it would have been impossible for any woman of
sense to endure, she spoke her resentment in a form of words perfectly
intelligible to me.—In short, my dear madam, it was a quarrel blameless
on her side, abominable on mine; and I returned the same evening to
Richmond, though I might have staid with you till the next morning,
merely because I would be as angry with her as possible. Mr. Harriet certainly was not clever, but she had a sweet, docile, grateful
disposition, was totally free from conceit, and only desiring to be
guided by any one she looked up to. I had not
the least idea!—Jane took Mrs. What his
pursuits, his talents, and genius?”

Sir John was rather puzzled. They had long wished to see him. To satisfy me, those characters must be united. He was immediately
interested. I do not know who is
good enough for him.”

Mr. The very first subject after being seated was Maple Grove, “My brother
Mr. That will be very bad.”

“How much his business engrosses him already is very plain from the
circumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended. Emma was gratified, to observe such a proof in her of
strengthened character, and refrained from any allusion that might
endanger its maintenance. As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile
across the park. I am not afraid of your not
being exceedingly comfortable with Mrs. I was
therefore entered at Oxford and have been properly idle ever since.”

“The consequence of which, I suppose, will be,” said Mrs. Jennings’s attempts at consolation were therefore
unfortunately founded, when she advised her daughter not to care about
their being so fashionable; because they were all cousins and must put
up with one another. Your ideas are only more noble than
mine. I have
always heard him spoken of as such, and your brother I know esteems him
highly. The present crisis, indeed, seemed
to be brought on by them; and those misunderstandings might very
possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct.”

“Impropriety! I have taken some pains for your sake, and
for Robert Martin’s sake, (whom I have always had reason to believe as
much in love with her as ever,) to get acquainted with her. I do not mean to justify
myself, but at the same time cannot leave you to suppose that I have
nothing to urge—that because she was injured she was irreproachable,
and because _I_ was a libertine, _she_ must be a saint. Knightley
know any thing about it for the world! Is
it kingdom? “No—he should not eat. Weston came into the room,
and I could get at him, I spoke to him about the carriage. Collins no sooner saw the two
girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which
Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked
to dine at Rosings the next day. Still, however, he was not
happy. Weston was a native of Highbury, and born of a respectable family,
which for the last two or three generations had been rising into
gentility and property. [Illustration:

“Tenderly flirting”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

Had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and
such realities as these, what would have been her sensations? We know, on the contrary, that he has so
much of both, that he is glad to get rid of them at the idlest haunts
in the kingdom. Dashwood could find explanations whenever she wanted them, which at
least satisfied herself. But that is one great difference between
us. “He must be an oddity, I think,” said she. He had
never been an unhappy man; his own temper had secured him from that,
even in his first marriage; but his second must shew him how delightful
a well-judging and truly amiable woman could be, and must give him the
pleasantest proof of its being a great deal better to choose than to be
chosen, to excite gratitude than to feel it. You said you had a
great many, and now you have not one left. John Knightley were to come down in August, and she was
invited to remain till they could bring her back. Knightley’s marrying Jane Fairfax?”

“Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very much occupied by the
idea of _not_ being in love with her, that I should not wonder if it
were to end in his being so at last. In no countenance was attentive
curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley’s, in spite of the
smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its
objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions
to Mr. What is
the amount of his fortune?”

“I believe about two thousand a year.”

“Two thousand a-year;” and then working himself up to a pitch of
enthusiastic generosity, he added, “Elinor, I wish with all my heart it
were _twice_ as much, for your sake.”

“Indeed I believe you,” replied Elinor; “but I am very sure that
Colonel Brandon has not the smallest wish of marrying _me_.”

“You are mistaken, Elinor; you are very much mistaken. Darcy only, entered the room. Palmer appeared quite well, and I am commissioned to tell you,
that you will certainly see her to-morrow.”

“Ay, to be sure, I thought as much. “My love, have you been asleep?” said his wife, laughing. here come the Richardsons. Harriet looked white and frightened, and he was trying to cheer
her.—The iron gates and the front-door were not twenty yards
asunder;—they were all three soon in the hall, and Harriet immediately
sinking into a chair fainted away. Consider,” she added, “that when the
money is once parted with, it never can return. Perry had been to Mrs. There is no hurry at all. “You are a very warm friend to Mr. The worn-out past was sunk in the freshness of what was
coming; and in the rapidity of half a moment’s thought, she hoped Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note
aloud, “if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if she
should die--it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of
Mr. Bennet, and they
gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Dashwood, but if he had done otherwise, I should have thought him a
rascal. She had not seen him before
since his engagement became public, and therefore not since his knowing
her to be acquainted with it; which, with the consciousness of what she
had been thinking of, and what she had to tell him, made her feel
particularly uncomfortable for some minutes. Another pause. ‘Lord! “I shall have a charming account to carry to Fanny,” said he, as he
walked back with his sister. Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of
interest, for Edward Ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had died
very rich; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence,
for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his fortune depended on the
will of his mother. CHAPTER XLV. From Elizabeth’s thoughts it was never absent. Darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from
the want of importance in his friend’s connections than from their want
of sense; and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly
governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of
retaining Mr. She was not the better pleased with his
gallantry, from the idea it suggested of something more. She was
deeply ashamed, and a little afraid of his next look. A very restless and feverish night, however, disappointed the
expectation of both; and when Marianne, after persisting in rising,
confessed herself unable to sit up, and returned voluntarily to her
bed, Elinor was very ready to adopt Mrs. I hope they are quite well. Elton, in the course of my life, that if
things are going untowardly one month, they are sure to mend the next.”

“Very true, Mr. I must do _this_ justice to Mr. She was perfectly convinced of it. at present I ask no more.”

Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment. Nobody is healthy in London, nobody can be. Her curiosity was greatly excited. The woods and walks thickly covered with
dead leaves.”

“Oh,” cried Marianne, “with what transporting sensation have I formerly
seen them fall! In feeling, in action, in condition, in
every thing.”

“Come, come; this is all an effusion of immediate want of spirits,
Edward. She had only two
daughters, both of whom she had lived to see respectably married, and
she had now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of the
world. “For my companion tells me,” said she, “that I absolutely promised Miss
Bates last night, that I would come this morning. Our poor mother is sadly grieved. How could she have been so brutal, so cruel to Miss Bates! Elton was to take the drawing to London, chuse the frame, and give
the directions; and Emma thought she could so pack it as to ensure its
safety without much incommoding him, while he seemed mostly fearful of
not being incommoded enough. [Illustration]




Chapter XLVI. I am
very sure you did me good. Collins had settled it
with her husband that the office of introduction should be hers, it was
performed in a proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks
which he would have thought necessary. The walk being here less
sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before they
met. The two other gentlemen
waited at the door to let her pass. I am sure
you did not much expect to like us. How cheerful, how animated, how suspicious, how busy
their imaginations all are!”

Harriet smiled again, and her smiles grew stronger. Mrs. My poor mother was half frantic.”

“Have you ever seen the lady?”

“Yes; once, while she was staying in this house, I happened to drop in
for ten minutes; and I saw quite enough of her. “Well,” said he, “we have brought you some strangers. Weston ever thought of her!”

“I cannot agree with you, papa; you know I cannot. She was quite
concerned and ashamed, and resolved to do such things no more. Martin again without perceiving him to be a very
inferior creature—and rather wondering at yourself for having ever
thought him at all agreeable before. But to what does all this lead? Wingfield before
you left home.”

“My dear Isabella,”—exclaimed he hastily—“pray do not concern yourself
about my looks. The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the
surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she
valued beyond that of any other person. We never see any thing of it on our
club-nights.”

The ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant, “Men never know
when things are dirty or not;” and the gentlemen perhaps thought each
to himself, “Women will have their little nonsenses and needless
cares.”

One perplexity, however, arose, which the gentlemen did not disdain. Willoughby, an equally striking opposition of character was no
hindrance to the regard of Colonel Brandon. How very odd!”

It was, indeed, so odd; Harriet’s behaviour was so extremely odd, that
Emma did not know how to understand it. This is
delightful, is not it?—Where’s dear Mr. “Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?”

“Not so much as I could wish, sir: but I dare say he may spend half his
time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months.”

“Except,” thought Elizabeth, “when she goes to Ramsgate.”

“If your master would marry, you might see more of him.”

“Yes, sir; but I do not know when _that_ will be. Very
nonsensical to come at all! Jennings laughed
heartily; and Elinor found that in her resolution to know where they
had been, she had actually made her own woman enquire of Mr. His choice is
disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing. The gentleman experienced some change of
feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and,
glancing over it, said, in a colder voice,--

“Are you pleased with Kent?”

A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side
calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte
and her sister, just returned from their walk. Oh! Mr. She heard
him sigh. You must come, indeed. You must be very much altered indeed since
we parted, if that could be the case, and you not there. she looks very bad. I expected much pleasure in it, but I have found none. Elton’s concerns were assuming the most
irresistible form.—His wedding-day was named. Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. “Not at all—I never saw him; but I fancy he is very unlike his
brother—silly and a great coxcomb.”

“A great coxcomb!” repeated Miss Steele, whose ear had caught those
words by a sudden pause in Marianne’s music. It was an arrangement, however,
justified in its effects, if not in its cause; for nothing ever
appeared in Robert’s style of living or of talking to give a suspicion
of his regretting the extent of his income, as either leaving his
brother too little, or bringing himself too much;—and if Edward might
be judged from the ready discharge of his duties in every particular,
from an increasing attachment to his wife and his home, and from the
regular cheerfulness of his spirits, he might be supposed no less
contented with his lot, no less free from every wish of an exchange. Willoughby—he has
broken no positive engagement with my sister.”

“Law, my dear! She looked back as well as she
could; but it was all confusion. Ten
thousand a year, and very likely more! “I do, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. When she remembered the style of his address,
she was still full of indignation: but when she considered how unjustly
she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against
herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion. Pride relates more to our opinion of
ourselves; vanity to what we would have others think of us.”

“If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy with him.”
]




CHAPTER LIII. But it
is always so. Knightley.—They had determined that their marriage ought
to be concluded while John and Isabella were still at Hartfield, to
allow them the fortnight’s absence in a tour to the seaside, which was
the plan.—John and Isabella, and every other friend, were agreed in
approving it. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight as she
had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. Mr. Collins, who entered with an air more stately
than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls,--

“Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and
let Mr. She had long resolved that one-and-twenty
should be the period. Darcy improves on acquaintance.”

“Indeed!” cried Wickham, with a look which did not escape her. She was mortified, shocked, confounded. Mr. I
should be sorry to have _you_ ill; you, that have been the greatest
comfort to me in the world!—Heaven knows what I should have done
without your friendship.”

Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubting her own success. “Poor soul!” cried Mrs. Every additional day of unhappy confidence,
on your side, would have made the blow more dreadful.”

“Engagement!” cried Marianne, “there has been no engagement.”

“No engagement!”

“No, he is not so unworthy as you believe him. You do not know what it is to have tempers
to manage.”

“It is not to be conceived that a man of three or four-and-twenty
should not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount. Our
importance, our respectability in the world, must be affected by the
wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark
Lydia’s character. Bates, deprived of her usual employment,
slumbering on one side of the fire, Frank Churchill, at a table near
her, most deedily occupied about her spectacles, and Jane Fairfax,
standing with her back to them, intent on her pianoforte. Oh that I had been with you! She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait. After that, I suppose, I _was_
wrong in remaining so much in Sussex, and the arguments with which I
reconciled myself to the expediency of it, were no better than
these:—The danger is my own; I am doing no injury to anybody but
myself.”

Elinor smiled, and shook her head. I never was more astonished in my life.”

“Lord! Knightley. Knightleys, that when once the event were
over, his distress would be soon over too, she hesitated—she could not
proceed. We must not be nice and ask for all the virtues into the
bargain. “Not at all,” was her answer; “but, depend upon it, he means to be
severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask
nothing about it.”

Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Elton declared she would not let
him off, he did not;—but my mother, and Jane, and I, were all there,
and a very agreeable evening we had. But what is distance, Mr. It
was all general approbation and smoothness; nothing delineated or
distinguished. Did not keep the
horses a moment. Compliments, charades, and horrible blunders; and it was
not to be supposed that poor Harriet should not be recollecting too;
but she behaved very well, and was only rather pale and silent. She supposed she must say more before she were entitled to his
clemency; but it was a hard case to be obliged still to lower herself
in his opinion. I have erred against every common-place notion of
decorum; I have been open and sincere where I ought to have been
reserved, spiritless, dull, and deceitful—had I talked only of the
weather and the roads, and had I spoken only once in ten minutes, this
reproach would have been spared.”

“My love,” said her mother, “you must not be offended with Elinor—she
was only in jest. Who _could_ about such a nasty little freckled
thing?”

Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such
coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_
was little other than her own breast had formerly harboured and fancied
liberal! That’s
very like. So exceeding affable as
she was! Mr. There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings.”

She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee-cup
himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying,--

“Is your sister at Pemberley still?”

“Yes; she will remain there till Christmas.”

“And quite alone? Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest.”

The colour now rushed into Elizabeth’s cheeks in the instantaneous
conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt;
and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained
himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to
herself, when her father continued,--

“You look conscious. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had
made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the
verdure of the early trees. She thought of
what had just passed with anxiety and distrust. She supposed, if he meant anything, he must
mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. She was a beautiful creature when she came
to you, but, in my opinion, the attractions you have added are
infinitely superior to what she received from nature.”

“I am glad you think I have been useful to her; but Harriet only wanted
drawing out, and receiving a few, very few hints. Tell her that you insist upon her
marrying him.”

“Let her be called down. The subject elevated him
to more than usual solemnity of manner; and with a most important aspect
he protested that he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a
person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himself
experienced from Lady Catherine. He left me not half an hour ago.”

She was still looking at him with the most speaking amazement. It was owing to _her_ persuasion, as she
thought his being out in bad weather did him a great deal of harm. And as to my poor
word ‘success,’ which you quarrel with, I do not know that I am so
entirely without any claim to it. by the bye,” then sinking his voice, and looking demure for the
moment—“I hope Mr. Weston was
very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion he made
himself—how much she saw to like in his disposition altogether. It was dated
from Rosings, at eight o’clock in the morning, and was as follows:--

“Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of
its containing any repetition of those sentiments, or renewal of those
offers, which were last night so disgusting to you. We have heard nothing from town.”

“Dear madam,” cried Mrs. Cole’s; but I shall not stop three minutes: and, Jane, you had better
go home directly—I would not have you out in a shower!—We think she is
the better for Highbury already. He took the hint,
and, when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud,--

“That will do extremely well, child. Mrs. “Poor Mrs. James Cooper; and of more than I can
enumerate. Darcy they had
only seen at church. He could not be satisfied without a
promise—would not she give him her influence in procuring it?”

“So scrupulous for others,” he continued, “and yet so careless for
herself! As Mrs. I never saw any thing so hard. Elton. I assure you I
began to think my cara sposo would be absolutely jealous. Mr. Wickham
had received his commission before he left London, and he was to join
his regiment at the end of a fortnight. This was a subject which ensured Marianne’s
attention, and she was beginning to describe her own admiration of
these scenes, and to question him more minutely on the objects that had
particularly struck him, when Edward interrupted her by saying, “You
must not enquire too far, Marianne—remember I have no knowledge in the
picturesque, and I shall offend you by my ignorance and want of taste
if we come to particulars. and Miss Bates,” said Emma, “I
have not heard one inquiry after them.”

“Oh! Ferrars is the happy man, is he? Sometimes, indeed, I have thought you were half suspecting me of
pleading poor Martin’s cause, which was never the case; but, from all
my observations, I am convinced of her being an artless, amiable girl,
with very good notions, very seriously good principles, and placing her
happiness in the affections and utility of domestic life.—Much of this,
I have no doubt, she may thank you for.”

“Me!” cried Emma, shaking her head.—“Ah! “Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did not go there, or that we
did not see the house? Remember it? “You write uncommonly fast.”

“You are mistaken. But I tell you what, Miss Lizzy, if you take it
into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,
you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is
to maintain you when your father is dead. Ferrars is married.”

Marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes upon Elinor, saw her
turning pale, and fell back in her chair in hysterics. Mr. My dear Jane, I am in
such a flutter, that I am sure I can’t write; so I will dictate, and you
write for me. he is ruined for ever. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr. and Lord
help ’em! Their dress was very smart, their manners very civil,
they were delighted with the house, and in raptures with the furniture,
and they happened to be so doatingly fond of children that Lady
Middleton’s good opinion was engaged in their favour before they had
been an hour at the Park. About a year ago, she was taken from school, and an
establishment formed for her in London; and last summer she went with
the lady who presided over it to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr. Mr. But I do not understand how
the room at the Crown can be safer for you than your father’s house.”

“From the very circumstance of its being larger, sir. Ferrars say
it herself—but her daughter _did_, and I have it from her,—that in
short, whatever objections there might be against a certain—a certain
connection, you understand me,—it would have been far preferable to
her,—it would not have given her half the vexation that _this_ does. Has he a house
at Allenham?”

On this point Sir John could give more certain intelligence; and he
told them that Mr. [Illustration]

The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw
Elizabeth into could not be easily overcome; nor could she for many
hours learn to think of it less than incessantly. Worse and worse. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well
when she came into the room this morning. He has not such a fine air
and way of walking as Mr. Knightley’s marrying; and I am sure it is not at all likely. Martin!” thought Emma. Weston, were not thrown away. Churchill was recovering, and he dared not yet, even in his own
imagination, fix a time for coming to Randalls again. Darcy. Is he not a man of
honour and feeling? The preparations must take
their time, nothing could be properly ready till the third week were
entered on, and for a few days they must be planning, proceeding and
hoping in uncertainty—at the risk—in her opinion, the great risk, of
its being all in vain. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. It is a pity that great ladies
in general are not more like her. Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with
which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as
frivolous as the application was ill-judged. It is
all for Jane’s sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to
him except just now and then; so do not put yourself to inconvenience.”

During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Not to wait upon a bride is very remiss. I have not a doubt of your
doing very well together. CHAPTER XLVI. for famous you must be to
satisfy all your family; and with no inclination for expense, no
affection for strangers, no profession, and no assurance, you may find
it a difficult matter.”

“I shall not attempt it. To give the feelings or the language of Mrs. What years of felicity that man, in all human calculation, has
before him!—Assured of the love of such a woman—the disinterested love,
for Jane Fairfax’s character vouches for her disinterestedness; every
thing in his favour,—equality of situation—I mean, as far as regards
society, and all the habits and manners that are important; equality in
every point but one—and that one, since the purity of her heart is not
to be doubted, such as must increase his felicity, for it will be his
to bestow the only advantages she wants.—A man would always wish to
give a woman a better home than the one he takes her from; and he who
can do it, where there is no doubt of _her_ regard, must, I think, be
the happiest of mortals.—Frank Churchill is, indeed, the favourite of
fortune. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and
good conduct, I am sure. Jennings, Lady Middleton’s mother, was a good-humoured, merry,
fat, elderly woman, who talked a great deal, seemed very happy, and
rather vulgar. Elton, rather mortified. Forgive me, if I am very saucy. Oh! But you really frightened me. Bennet’s property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two
thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed,
in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother’s
fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply
the deficiency of his. The party was rather large, as it included one other family, a proper
unobjectionable country family, whom the Coles had the advantage of
naming among their acquaintance, and the male part of Mr. Frank Churchill still declined it, looking as serious as he could,
and his father gave his hearty support by calling out, “My good friend,
this is quite unnecessary; Frank knows a puddle of water when he sees
it, and as to Mrs. Mr. Resignation to
inevitable evils is the duty of us all: the peculiar duty of a young man
who has been so fortunate as I have been, in early preferment; and, I
trust, I am resigned. He was on one side of her mother. When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having
promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. [Illustration:

     “Engaged by the river”
]




CHAPTER XLV. Ferrars could say to make
him put an end to the engagement, assisted too as you may well suppose
by my arguments, and Fanny’s entreaties, was of no avail. Some people even talked of a
promise to his wife on her deathbed, and others of the son and the
uncle not letting him. Bates and Mrs. Jennings had assigned him for her own satisfaction, were now
actually excited by her sister; and that however a general resemblance
of disposition between the parties might forward the affection of Mr. What do you advise?”

“That you do not give another half-second to the subject. It is his companion all this
evening, his solace, his delight. Lord! Perhaps
they began to feel it might have been kinder and wiser to have resisted
the temptation of any delay, and spared her from a taste of such
enjoyments of ease and leisure as must now be relinquished. Mrs. At
that moment Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass
through the set to the other side of the room; but, on perceiving Mr. I am, therefore, by no means discouraged by what you have
just said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.”

“Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is rather an
extraordinary one after my declaration. She had always seen it with pain; but
respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of
herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to
banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation
and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own
children, was so highly reprehensible. Wickham’s
chief object was unquestionably my sister’s fortune, which is thirty
thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of revenging
himself on me was a strong inducement. I believe you were glad we
danced no longer; but I would have given worlds—all the worlds one ever
has to give—for another half-hour.”

She played. Gardiner’s behaviour laid them all under. But with _me_, it is not so. The difficulty was great of driving his strange insensibility
towards Harriet, from her mind, while he not only sat at her elbow, but
was continually obtruding his happy countenance on her notice, and
solicitously addressing her upon every occasion. He bore with philosophy the conviction that
Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude
and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and, in spite of
everything, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be
prevailed on to make his fortune. You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.”

“But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in
accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry
elsewhere?”

“You must decide for yourself,” said Elizabeth; “and if, upon mature
deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is
more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you,
by all means, to refuse him.”

“How can you talk so?” said Jane, faintly smiling; “you must know, that,
though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could
not hesitate.”

“I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider
your situation with much compassion.”

“But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be
required. Good Heaven! Oh! He had met Mrs. and Miss Bates returned the
visit. “My dear madam,” he replied, “this invitation is particularly
gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you
may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as
possible.”

They were all astonished; and Mr. No indeed!—There was not a hint of Mr. They insist also on
     my seeing Mr. But she shall forgive me again, and
on more reasonable grounds. pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for
there is such a sight to be seen! Impossible! While I, to blind the world to our engagement, was
behaving one hour with objectionable particularity to another woman,
was she to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have made
every previous caution useless?—Had we been met walking together
between Donwell and Highbury, the truth must have been suspected.—I was
mad enough, however, to resent.—I doubted her affection. Mr. But it is of small importance.”

“I might as well inquire,” replied she, “why, with so evident a design
of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me
against your will, against your reason, and even against your character? Pray call
again as soon as possible, and explain the reason of my having expected
this in vain. But however insincere _you_ may
choose to be, you shall not find _me_ so. Mr. But you are always giving _her_ the preference.”

“They have none of them much to recommend them,” replied he: “they are
all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of
quickness than her sisters.”

“Mr. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. I admire all that quaint,
old-fashioned politeness; it is much more to my taste than modern ease;
modern ease often disgusts me. The idea of
her being indebted to Mrs. “Now,” said Harriet, “you _must_ recollect.”

“No, indeed I do not.”

“Dear me! That’s right. Dashwood had never been so much pleased with any young women in her
life, as she was with them; had given each of them a needle book made
by some emigrant; called Lucy by her Christian name; and did not know
whether she should ever be able to part with them. “This fine account of him,” whispered her aunt as they walked, “is not
quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.”

“Perhaps we might be deceived.”

“That is not very likely; our authority was too good.”

On reaching the spacious lobby above, they were shown into a very pretty
sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than
the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to
give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room, when
last at Pemberley. This is strange indeed, when your eyes have
been reproaching them every day for incautiousness.”

“I want no proof of their affection,” said Elinor; “but of their
engagement I do.”

“I am perfectly satisfied of both.”

“Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the subject, by either of
them.”

“I have not wanted syllables where actions have spoken so plainly. She proved to
be the daughter of a tradesman, rich enough to afford her the
comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers, and decent enough to
have always wished for concealment.—Such was the blood of gentility
which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for!—It was likely to be
as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many a gentleman: but what a
connexion had she been preparing for Mr. I _will_ be more
collected—more concise. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XX. She blushed again and
again over the perverseness of the meeting. Sorrow came—a gentle sorrow—but not at all in the shape of any
disagreeable consciousness.—Miss Taylor married. I
absolutely must go in by myself, though I hate being stuck up in the
barouche-landau without a companion; but Augusta, I believe, with her
own good-will, would never stir beyond the park paling.’ Many a time
has she said so; and yet I am no advocate for entire seclusion. I could not answer it. Mr. John Dashwood, a gentleman-like and pleasing young
man, who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister’s
establishment at Norland, and who had since spent the greatest part of
his time there. The preferment, which only two days before she had considered as
hopeless for Edward, was already provided to enable him to marry; and
_she_, of all people in the world, was fixed on to bestow it! Jennings, on account of her sister being
indisposed. This lock of hair, which now he can
so readily give up, was begged of me with the most earnest
supplication. I was afraid there could be little chance of my
hearing any thing of Miss Fairfax to-day.”

“So obliging of you! That nature had given it in feature could not be unseen
by the young woman, nor could her higher powers of mind be unfelt by
the parents. “You may readily comprehend,” she added, “what my curiosity must be to
know how a person unconnected with any of us, and, comparatively
speaking, a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such
a time. Knightley, “that need not be the consequence. _Some_ _part_ of his conduct we
cannot excuse.”

Emma pondered a moment, and then replied, “I will not pretend _not_ to
understand you; and to give you all the relief in my power, be assured
that no such effect has followed his attentions to me, as you are
apprehensive of.”

Mrs. The estate at Delaford was never reckoned more than two
thousand a year, and his brother left everything sadly involved. His appearance was very
neat, and he looked like a sensible young man, but his person had no
other advantage; and when he came to be contrasted with gentlemen, she
thought he must lose all the ground he had gained in Harriet’s
inclination. As far as good
intentions went, we were _both_ right, and I must say that no effects
on my side of the argument have yet proved wrong. Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her mother had been quite rude
enough,—for, colouring a little, she immediately said,

“They are very pretty, ma’am—an’t they?” But then again, the dread of
having been too civil, too encouraging herself, probably came over her,
for she presently added,

“Do you not think they are something in Miss Morton’s style of
painting, Ma’am?—_She does_ paint most delightfully!—How beautifully
her last landscape is done!”

“Beautifully indeed! But that it was so, had not
only been declared by Lucy’s eyes at the time, but was declared over
again the next morning more openly, for at her particular desire, Lady
Middleton set her down in Berkeley Street on the chance of seeing
Elinor alone, to tell her how happy she was. But though confidence between them was, by this public
discovery, restored to its proper state, it was not a subject on which
either of them were fond of dwelling when alone. and
with the knowledge of your ill opinion too! “I am sure,” she added, “if it was not for such good friends, I do not
know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a
vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is
always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest
temper I ever met with. Emma spoke for her. At last, with some hesitation, Harriet said—

“Miss Woodhouse, as you will not give me your opinion, I must do as
well as I can by myself; and I have now quite determined, and really
almost made up my mind—to refuse Mr. Weston. He had been at the
pains of consulting Mr. I
have a great deal of vivacity in my own way, but I really must be
allowed to judge when to speak and when to hold my tongue. A mind lively and at
ease, can do with seeing nothing, and can see nothing that does not
answer. Weston might be his son’s superior.—In spite of this
little rub, however, Emma was smiling with enjoyment, delighted to see
the respectable length of the set as it was forming, and to feel that
she had so many hours of unusual festivity before her.—She was more
disturbed by Mr. After sitting with them a
few minutes, the Miss Steeles returned to the Park, and Elinor was then
at liberty to think and be wretched. Weston, of a
more apprehensive disposition, foresaw nothing but a repetition of
excuses and delays; and after all her concern for what her husband was
to suffer, suffered a great deal more herself. Knightley, would imagine it possible. Her opinion varying with every
fresh conjecture, and all seeming equally probable as they arose. Knightley to all the world; let Donwell and Hartfield lose none of
their precious intercourse of friendship and confidence, and her peace
would be fully secured.—Marriage, in fact, would not do for her. I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. Though her manner
varied, however, her determination never did. My mother was the first person who told
me of it; and I, feeling myself called on to act with resolution,
immediately said to her, ‘My dear madam, I do not know what you may
intend to do on the occasion, but as for myself, I must say, that if
Edward does marry this young woman, _I_ never will see him again.’ That
was what I said immediately. Such amiable qualities must speak for
themselves. She felt for
Harriet, with pain and with contrition; but no flight of generosity run
mad, opposing all that could be probable or reasonable, entered her
brain. And even Sir John’s joking
intelligence must have had some weight. I have had my doubts, I confess; but they are
fainter than they were, and they may soon be entirely done away. Mrs. Impatient in this situation to be doing
something that might lead to her sister’s relief, Elinor resolved to
write the next morning to her mother, and hoped by awakening her fears
for the health of Marianne, to procure those inquiries which had been
so long delayed; and she was still more eagerly bent on this measure by
perceiving after breakfast on the morrow, that Marianne was again
writing to Willoughby, for she could not suppose it to be to any other
person. It is not likely that I _should_, considering what I have been
used to. In this danger Kitty
is also comprehended. “You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure,--therefore you need not
conceal your age.”

“I am not one-and-twenty.”

When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card tables
were placed. He must and does love her I am sure.”

“But with a strange kind of tenderness, if he can leave her with such
indifference, such carelessness of the future, as you attribute to
him.”

“You must remember, my dear mother, that I have never considered this
matter as certain. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but
tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them,
after they are married. Elton,” she replied, starting on this appeal;
“is he—is he a tall man?”

“Who shall answer that question?” cried Emma. Mr. John, the second,
is named after his father. To the rest of the family they paid little attention;
avoiding Mrs. Bennet from
fighting. Wingfield says it is
entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy; and I am sure he may
be depended on, for he thoroughly understands the nature of the air,
and his own brother and family have been there repeatedly.”

“You should have gone to Cromer, my dear, if you went anywhere.—Perry
was a week at Cromer once, and he holds it to be the best of all the
sea-bathing places. Weston? To Elizabeth it appeared, that had her family made an agreement to
expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would
have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit, or
finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister
that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his
feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he
must have witnessed. He had seen the coachmen, and they both agreed with
him in there being nothing to apprehend. No officer is ever to enter my house
again, nor even to pass through the village. To complete every other recommendation, he
had _almost_ told her that he loved her. They were just approaching the house where lived Mrs. Jennings’s house; but it was not a thing to be urged
against the wishes of everybody. Weston, upon his behaviour to whom her opinion of him
was to depend. I
hope, from the bottom of my heart, he won’t keep her waiting much
longer, for it is quite grievous to see her look so ill and forlorn. She will be extremely sorry to miss seeing you, Miss Woodhouse,
but your kindness will excuse her. I am sure she will be pleased with the
children. I should be quite in the way. She was soon undressed and
in bed, and as she seemed desirous of being alone, her sister then left
her, and while she waited the return of Mrs. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came to inquire, and
he bowed as they passed. When Mr. Mrs. Mr. Fanny was startled at the proposal. The first error and the worst lay at her door. He was a particular
friend of Sir John’s. There was no help
for it, however. She instantly saw that it was not unnoticed by him, that he even
observed Marianne as she quitted the room, with such astonishment and
concern, as hardly left him the recollection of what civility demanded
towards herself. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and
Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such
raptures as Mr. Goddard’s, who had been also at the ball, had walked out together, and
taken a road, the Richmond road, which, though apparently public enough
for safety, had led them into alarm.—About half a mile beyond Highbury,
making a sudden turn, and deeply shaded by elms on each side, it became
for a considerable stretch very retired; and when the young ladies had
advanced some way into it, they had suddenly perceived at a small
distance before them, on a broader patch of greensward by the side, a
party of gipsies. Are not you
curious to hear how it was managed?”

“No, really,” replied Elizabeth; “I think there cannot be too little
said on the subject.”

“La! But it is so uncertain, when I may have it in
my power to return, that I dare not engage for it at all.”

“Oh! And how could
it possibly come into your head?”

“I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of attachment between
them—certain expressive looks, which I did not believe meant to be
public.”

“Oh! Of having another daughter married to Mr. His evils seemed to lessen, her own advantages to increase, their
mutual good to outweigh every drawback. And how could it be
supposed that his uncle and aunt would spare him again?’ and so forth—I
always felt that something would happen in our favour; and so it has,
you see. By reading only six hours a-day, I shall
gain in the course of a twelve-month a great deal of instruction which
I now feel myself to want.”

Elinor honoured her for a plan which originated so nobly as this;
though smiling to see the same eager fancy which had been leading her
to the extreme of languid indolence and selfish repining, now at work
in introducing excess into a scheme of such rational employment and
virtuous self-control. We really are so shocked! A few weeks, he believed. _What_ she was, must be
uncertain; but _who_ she was, might be found out; and setting aside the
10,000 l., it did not appear that she was at all Harriet’s superior. “But now that my dear uncle is come, I hope
everything will be well.”

“Is my father in town?”

“Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.”

“And have you heard from him often?”

“We have heard only once. What his mother really is we cannot know; but, from
Fanny’s occasional mention of her conduct and opinions, we have never
been disposed to think her amiable; and I am very much mistaken if
Edward is not himself aware that there would be many difficulties in
his way, if he were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a great
fortune or high rank.”

Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination of her mother
and herself had outstripped the truth. John Dashwood put an end to the subject. Weston. I congratulate her. I
hope it does him some service with you.”

“Yes, certainly it does. “That fellow,” said he, indignantly, “thinks of nothing but shewing off
his own voice. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more
about it, and to ask when Mr. I only wanted to prove to you that Mrs. Thomas’s intelligence seemed over. She dearly loved her father, but he was no companion for her. Jennings at home. Weston, there is a step at the turning. But I think, my dear, you said you had got it.”

“Yes, papa, it is written out in our second page. Some little
present of furniture too may be acceptable then.”

“Certainly,” returned Mrs. With the greatest respect, and the warmest
friendship, do I mention Miss Woodhouse; my father perhaps will think I
ought to add, with the deepest humiliation.—A few words which dropped
from him yesterday spoke his opinion, and some censure I acknowledge
myself liable to.—My behaviour to Miss Woodhouse indicated, I believe,
more than it ought.—In order to assist a concealment so essential to
me, I was led on to make more than an allowable use of the sort of
intimacy into which we were immediately thrown.—I cannot deny that Miss
Woodhouse was my ostensible object—but I am sure you will believe the
declaration, that had I not been convinced of her indifference, I would
not have been induced by any selfish views to go on.—Amiable and
delightful as Miss Woodhouse is, she never gave me the idea of a young
woman likely to be attached; and that she was perfectly free from any
tendency to being attached to me, was as much my conviction as my
wish.—She received my attentions with an easy, friendly, goodhumoured
playfulness, which exactly suited me. But sometimes of an
evening, before we went to cards, he would read something aloud out of
the Elegant Extracts, very entertaining. Richard?—Oh! No, I would not be the means of
giving them any pain. They were, therefore, to go. And is no
allowance to be made for inadvertence, or for spirits depressed by
recent disappointment? Though,
perhaps, as the _Chaperon_ of the party—_I_ never was in any
circle—exploring parties—young ladies—married women—”

Her mutterings were chiefly to her husband; and he murmured, in reply,

“Very true, my love, very true. But she had made up her mind how to meet this presumption so many weeks
before it appeared, that when the insult came at last, it found her
very differently affected. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my
     impertinence. a fine complimentary opening: But it is his
way. The intermediate month was the one fixed on, as far as they dared, by
Emma and Mr. She is a great
reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.”

“I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,” cried Elizabeth; “I
am _not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.”

“In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,” said Bingley; “and
I hope it will soon be increased by seeing her quite well.”

Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards a table
where a few books were lying. Jenkinson’s room. They were off Saturday night about
twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at
eight. The horses
were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who
preceded it, were familiar to them. Bates had a
bad cold about a month ago.”

“How sorry I am! Knightley seemed determined to be heard in
his turn, for most resolutely and commandingly did he say,

“How is your niece, Miss Bates?—I want to inquire after you all, but
particularly your niece. Woodhouse, in his
quiet way. I guessed
how it would end.”

“And yet two thousand a-year is a very moderate income,” said Marianne. “And you must be off this very morning?”

“Yes; my father is to join me here: we shall walk back together, and I
must be off immediately. or have
you none but that of waiting for Mrs. In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his
cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. Indeed, to say the truth, I am convinced within
myself that your father had no idea of your giving them any money at
all. I am sure she is
very good—I hope she will be very happy. no one, no one—he talked
to me only of myself.”

Another pause ensued; Marianne was greatly agitated, and it ended thus. Where did he live? The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the
evening. There are secrets in all families, you know)—The case is,
that a party of friends are invited to pay a visit at Enscombe in
January; and that Frank’s coming depends upon their being put off. She had not at first thought very seriously of
going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the
plan, and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater
pleasure as well as greater certainty. The strangeness of Mr. In the society of his nephew and niece, and their
children, the old Gentleman’s days were comfortably spent. I
honestly said as much to Mr. I am
very, very sorry. In a few minutes they
could distinguish him to be a gentleman; and in a moment afterwards
Marianne rapturously exclaimed,

“It is he; it is indeed;—I know it is!”—and was hastening to meet him,
when Elinor cried out,

“Indeed, Marianne, I think you are mistaken. and this prepared a future mine of raillery
against the devoted Elinor, which nothing but the newness of their
acquaintance with Edward could have prevented from being immediately
sprung. With such sensations, Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his
successful love; for Mrs. But it
was her business to be satisfied--and certainly her temper to be happy;
and all was soon right again. She could not
endure its noise. She laughed because she was disappointed;
and though she liked him for his attentions, and thought them all,
whether in friendship, admiration, or playfulness, extremely judicious,
they were not winning back her heart. Jennings. Even Elizabeth might have found some
trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement
of her acquaintance with Mr. I grieve to find, however, that Colonel F. “There is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends, the
Eltons,” was his next observation.—“His feelings are natural.—What! Knightley, if you will not
consider me as doing a very rude thing, I shall take Emma’s advice and
go out for a quarter of an hour. It is
to be a morning scheme, you know, Knightley; quite a simple thing. Churchill does not
feel that, why should we? It was not thought
necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh’s family. But what did such particulars explain?—The fact was, as Emma could now
acknowledge, that Harriet had always liked Robert Martin; and that his
continuing to love her had been irresistible.—Beyond this, it must ever
be unintelligible to Emma. He had not much
intercourse with any families beyond that circle; his horror of late
hours, and large dinner-parties, made him unfit for any acquaintance
but such as would visit him on his own terms. Your meaning must be
unequivocal; no doubts or demurs: and such expressions of gratitude and
concern for the pain you are inflicting as propriety requires, will
present themselves unbidden to _your_ mind, I am persuaded. You have every body
dearest to you always at hand, I, probably, never shall again; and
therefore till I have outlived all my affections, a post-office, I
think, must always have power to draw me out, in worse weather than
to-day.”

“When I talked of your being altered by time, by the progress of
years,” said John Knightley, “I meant to imply the change of situation
which time usually brings. I have
often talked to her a good deal. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Philips
protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery
tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. There is no comparison between them. You never wrote a truer line.” And having gone through
what immediately followed of the basis of their disagreement, and his
persisting to act in direct opposition to Jane Fairfax’s sense of
right, he made a fuller pause to say, “This is very bad.—He had induced
her to place herself, for his sake, in a situation of extreme
difficulty and uneasiness, and it should have been his first object to
prevent her from suffering unnecessarily.—She must have had much more
to contend with, in carrying on the correspondence, than he could. “Now, Palmer, you shall see a
monstrous pretty girl.”

He immediately went into the passage, opened the front door, and
ushered her in himself. But little had
she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there. Darcy! His
situation is an evil—but you must consider it as what satisfies your
friend; and I will answer for your thinking better and better of him as
you know him more. Jennings was not
struck by the same thought; for soon after his entrance, she walked
across the room to the tea-table where Elinor presided, and whispered,
“The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see. I did not even know, till
I understood his design, that the living was vacant; nor had it ever
occurred to me that he might have had such a living in his gift. I beg your pardon, sir. “Did you see them off, before you came away?”

“No, ma’am—the horses were just coming out, but I could not bide any
longer; I was afraid of being late.”

“Did Mrs. “None at all, ma’am, I thank you.”

“Was it from Avignon? I made the match,
you know, four years ago; and to have it take place, and be proved in
the right, when so many people said Mr. At that instant she felt,
that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for
moments of such painful confusion. By nature inoffensive,
friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St. For Miss ———, read Miss Smith. She read nothing but what they had been
used to read together. Mr. It was a concern which
brought just employment enough. As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and
shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information;
and he soon afterwards said aloud, “Mrs. I came to try you. He asked my opinion as to what he was now to do. Little did Mr. Had she left her where she
ought, and where he had told her she ought!—Had she not, with a folly
which no tongue could express, prevented her marrying the
unexceptionable young man who would have made her happy and respectable
in the line of life to which she ought to belong—all would have been
safe; none of this dreadful sequel would have been. Give me the book, I will write it down, and then there can
be no possible reflection on you.”

Harriet submitted, though her mind could hardly separate the parts, so
as to feel quite sure that her friend were not writing down a
declaration of love. But, Lizzy, you can tell
us whether it is like or not.”

Mrs. I was too much shocked to be
able to pass myself off as insensible even to the undiscerning Sir
John. But whatever might be the particulars of their separation, her sister’s
affliction was indubitable; and she thought with the tenderest
compassion of that violent sorrow which Marianne was in all probability
not merely giving way to as a relief, but feeding and encouraging as a
duty. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying that she will
include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she
honours us during your stay here. Dashwood, she preferred going
directly to the cottage to being a visitor at Barton Park; and she
relied so undoubtingly on Sir John’s description of the house, as to
feel no curiosity to examine it herself till she entered it as her own. Mr. You are determined to ruin him in
the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.”

“Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied Elizabeth, “has any
possible claim on me, in the present instance. In a few minutes the carriage returned.—Somebody talked of rain.—“I
will see that there are umbrellas, sir,” said Frank to his father:
“Miss Bates must not be forgotten:” and away he went. He makes a monstrous deal of money, and
they keep their own coach. Weston’s poultry-house was robbed one night of all her
turkeys—evidently by the ingenuity of man. and she and her partner the
happiest!—“I said it would be so,” was the only consolation. It is unaccountable! Martin dined with them last Saturday.”

“Oh!”

“He came to their father upon some business, and he asked him to stay
to dinner.”

“Oh!”

“They talked a great deal about him, especially Anne Cox. At length, in a voice of forced calmness, he said,--

“And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting! We all know the
difference between the pronouns he or she and thou, the plainest spoken
amongst us; we all feel the influence of a something beyond common
civility in our personal intercourse with each other—a something more
early implanted. After sitting
for a moment in silence, she said, very stiffly, to Elizabeth,--

“I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. He was giving orders for
a toothpick-case for himself, and till its size, shape, and ornaments
were determined, all of which, after examining and debating for a
quarter of an hour over every toothpick-case in the shop, were finally
arranged by his own inventive fancy, he had no leisure to bestow any
other attention on the two ladies, than what was comprised in three or
four very broad stares; a kind of notice which served to imprint on
Elinor the remembrance of a person and face, of strong, natural,
sterling insignificance, though adorned in the first style of fashion. I was so
astonished when she first told me what she had been saying to Mrs. But
I hope, Miss Woodhouse, that supposing—that if—strange as it may
appear—. Martin, who bore a part in the narrative, and was
always mentioned with approbation for his great good-nature in doing
something or other, was a single man; that there was no young Mrs. I had allowed her,
(imprudently, as it has since turned out,) at her earnest desire, to go
to Bath with one of her young friends, who was attending her father
there for his health. When he did return, he sought out the child and took
notice of her. Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward’s conduct, but only
Elinor and Marianne understood its true merit. Poor little Lizzy! Jennings, who had not patience enough to
wait till the door was opened before she told _her_ story. Bennet’s leaving them together, after a
longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could
not help saying,--

“O that my dear mother had more command over herself! Mr. The envelope itself was likewise
full. What are they saying about Mr. so handsome! She could not respect his eye, but his love and
his complaisance were unexceptionable. Knightley
would ask; but a very short parley with her own heart produced the most
solemn resolution of never quitting her father.—She even wept over the
idea of it, as a sin of thought. But stranger things have
happened; and when we cease to care for each other as we do now, it
will be the means of confirming us in that sort of true disinterested
friendship which I can already look forward to with pleasure.”

It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet’s behalf, though it
might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom; for evil in that
quarter was at hand. Their resemblance in good principles and
good sense, in disposition and manner of thinking, would probably have
been sufficient to unite them in friendship, without any other
attraction; but their being in love with two sisters, and two sisters
fond of each other, made that mutual regard inevitable and immediate,
which might otherwise have waited the effect of time and judgment. A man at his age—what is
he?—three or four-and-twenty—cannot be without the means of doing as
much as that. He started. The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the
world; though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away,
they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune. In short, she sat, during the first visit, looking at Jane Fairfax with
twofold complacency; the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering
justice, and was determining that she would dislike her no longer. Indeed I do you justice, my good friend. The purity of her life, the formality of her notions, her
ignorance of the world—every thing was against me. so charming as you are!”—

Emma laughed, and replied,

“My being charming, Harriet, is not quite enough to induce me to marry;
I must find other people charming—one other person at least. Had I
died, in what peculiar misery should I have left you, my nurse, my
friend, my sister! That is _court_. Her
unwillingness to quit her mother was her only restorative to calmness;
and at the moment of parting her grief on that score was excessive. It is
not likely that I should now see or hear any thing to change them.”

“Marianne is as steadfast as ever, you see,” said Elinor, “she is not
at all altered.”

“She is only grown a little more grave than she was.”

“Nay, Edward,” said Marianne, “_you_ need not reproach me. He merely meant to persuade her to give up the
engagement; and as there could be nothing to overcome but the affection
of both, he naturally expected that one or two interviews would settle
the matter. She could hardly determine what her own expectation of its event really
was; though she earnestly tried to drive away the notion of its being
possible to end otherwise at last, than in the marriage of Edward and
Lucy. A pleasant “thank
you” seemed meant to laugh it off, but a blush, a quivering lip, a tear
in the eye, shewed that it was felt beyond a laugh. I should never
deserve her confidence again, after forcing from her a confession of
what is meant at present to be unacknowledged to any one. Their party was small, and the hours passed quietly away. She would have ordered the
carriage, and come to you, but she must see you _alone_, and that you
know—(nodding towards her father)—Humph!—Can you come?”

“Certainly. It is but natural that he should like to see her as well
as ourselves.”

Marianne looked at her steadily, and said, “You know, Elinor, that this
is a kind of talking which I cannot bear. They will have no carriage, no horses, and hardly any
servants; they will keep no company, and can have no expenses of any
kind! I shall persuade her if I
can to go early to bed, for I am sure she wants rest.”

“Aye, I believe that will be best for her. and A.—Em-ma.—Do you understand?”

Understanding and gratification came together. But I know they will, because it
is a family that a certain lady, of some consequence, at Enscombe, has
a particular dislike to: and though it is thought necessary to invite
them once in two or three years, they always are put off when it comes
to the point. Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was
despatched to Longbourn, to acquaint the family with her stay, and bring
back a supply of clothes. ‘Nobody was ever so fortunate as
herself!’—but with many, many thanks—‘there was no occasion to trouble
us, for Mr. “Is not this most vexatious, Knightley?” she cried.—“And such weather
for exploring!—These delays and disappointments are quite odious. At length, however, our
     kind friend procured the wished-for direction. Darcy acquainted with their fears for
her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper
termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its
unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the
spot. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your
family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your
daughter’s favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Collins,” said she, “speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her
daughter; but, from some particulars that he has related of her
Ladyship, I suspect his gratitude misleads him; and that, in spite of
her being his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.”

“I believe her to be both in a great degree,” replied Wickham; “I have
not seen her for many years; but I very well remember that I never liked
her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. Mr. She returned just in time to join the others as they quitted the house,
on an excursion through its more immediate premises; and the rest of
the morning was easily whiled away, in lounging round the kitchen
garden, examining the bloom upon its walls, and listening to the
gardener’s lamentations upon blights, in dawdling through the
green-house, where the loss of her favourite plants, unwarily exposed,
and nipped by the lingering frost, raised the laughter of
Charlotte,—and in visiting her poultry-yard, where, in the disappointed
hopes of her dairy-maid, by hens forsaking their nests, or being stolen
by a fox, or in the rapid decrease of a promising young brood, she
found fresh sources of merriment. The improvement of
spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became as
perfect as plan could be. [Illustration]

Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford; but his visit was long
enough to convince him of his daughter’s being most comfortably settled,
and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not
often met with. To be constantly living with an ill-tempered
person, must be dreadful. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to
contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of
its contents. As for the navy, it had fashion on its side, but I was too old when the
subject was first started to enter it—and, at length, as there was no
necessity for my having any profession at all, as I might be as dashing
and expensive without a red coat on my back as with one, idleness was
pronounced on the whole to be most advantageous and honourable, and a
young man of eighteen is not in general so earnestly bent on being busy
as to resist the solicitations of his friends to do nothing. They were looking
over views in Swisserland. [Illustration]

Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
were particularly intimate. A very gracious invitation was returned, and the evening no
longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion. Since he had neglected to do it on first coming
to the estate, their quitting his house might be looked on as the most
suitable period for its accomplishment. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over,
he was the admirer of some one else. Harriet could not very soon give an intelligible account. My
mother is so delighted!—for she is to be three months with us at least. Jennings’s compassion
she had other claims. The interest he takes in her—his anxiety about her
health—his concern that she should have no happier prospect! Mrs. Nothing
should prevail on him to give up his engagement. I am almost sure it is, for I
saw him cut it off. “I have no doubt of its being our
carriage with Miss Bates and Jane. Only think of _that_, my dear: he actually danced with her
twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second
time. There was one, however, which Emma thought something
of.—The two last dances before supper were begun, and Harriet had no
partner;—the only young lady sitting down;—and so equal had been
hitherto the number of dancers, that how there could be any one
disengaged was the wonder!—But Emma’s wonder lessened soon afterwards,
on seeing Mr. Our coachman and horses are so
extremely expeditious!—I believe we drive faster than any body.—What a
pleasure it is to send one’s carriage for a friend!—I understand you
were so kind as to offer, but another time it will be quite
unnecessary. He
was not seated by her: perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but
it had not been so in Derbyshire. Collins’s fancying himself in love with her
friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two: but
that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility
as that she could encourage him herself; and her astonishment was
consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and
she could not help crying out,--

“Engaged to Mr. But I thought of her, I believe, every moment of the day. Elton’s manners are superior to Mr. Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be a
difficult question to answer; Mr. Jane’s temper was not desponding; and she was gradually led to hope,
though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that
Bingley would return to Netherfield, and answer every wish of her heart. If I
could but have kept longer away!”

They now walked on together quietly, till within view of the vicarage
pales, when a sudden resolution, of at least getting Harriet into the
house, made her again find something very much amiss about her boot,
and fall behind to arrange it once more. Imagine our
surprise. A few minutes were sufficient
for making her acquainted with her own heart. It must be an amusing study.”

“Yes; but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. and Mrs. But every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had
believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to
render Mr. Elton, and her
remonstrances now opened upon Jane. Elton.” Emma restrained her
indignation, and only turned from her in silence. Elton fidgeting behind her and watching every
touch. Elton indeed!” cried Harriet indignantly.—“Oh! However, _I_ shall always think it a very pleasant party,
and feel extremely obliged to the kind friends who included me in it.”

“Miss Fairfax, I suppose, though you were not aware of it, had been
making up her mind the whole day?”

“I dare say she had.”

“Whenever the time may come, it must be unwelcome to her and all her
friends—but I hope her engagement will have every alleviation that is
possible—I mean, as to the character and manners of the family.”

“Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse. Mrs. This he considered sufficient encouragement,
and the avowal of all that he felt and had long felt for her immediately
followed. It was a large, well-proportioned
room, handsomely fitted up. Philips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from
their recent absence, were particularly welcome; and she was eagerly
expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as their own
carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if
she had not happened to see Mr. Goddard would be very much
surprized if she knew what had happened. And as she could now have nothing more painful to hear on
the subject than had already been told, she did not mistrust her own
ability of going through a repetition of particulars with composure. You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most
advantageous. He never tells me any
thing! Henry Dashwood to his wishes, which proceeded not merely from
interest, but from goodness of heart, gave him every degree of solid
comfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulness of the
children added a relish to his existence. It was the
offer of a small house, on very easy terms, belonging to a relation of
her own, a gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire. Dennison’s mistake, in supposing his sisters their guests, had
suggested the propriety of their being really invited to become such,
while Mrs. I never met with her equal. “Do not give way to useless alarm,” added he: “though it is right to be
prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain. We can ask your sisters some other year, you know; but the Miss
Steeles may not be in town any more. The
wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his
feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a
blow as this. Poor Eliza! Ay, to be sure, he must be ordained in readiness;
and I am very glad to find things are so forward between you. Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had
she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as her
future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her
Ladyship’s indignation would have been. I am sure it will all end well, and there will be no
difficulties at all, to what I used to think. She had fallen into good hands, known
nothing but kindness from the Campbells, and been given an excellent
education. He seemed to me very well off as he was. Mr. But why should not I wear pink ribbons? Ferrars.”

“Well, well; whatever Colonel Brandon may be, Edward is a very lucky
man.—You will not mention the matter to Fanny, however, for though I
have broke it to her, and she bears it vastly well,—she will not like
to hear it much talked of.”

Elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from observing, that she
thought Fanny might have borne with composure, an acquisition of wealth
to her brother, by which neither she nor her child could be possibly
impoverished. Have we not perfectly understood each other? “I am astonished,” said Miss Bingley, “that my father should have left
so small a collection of books. If they marry, they will be sure of doing well, and if they do
not, they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of ten
thousand pounds.”

“That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know whether, upon the
whole, it would not be more advisable to do something for their mother
while she lives, rather than for them—something of the annuity kind I
mean.—My sisters would feel the good effects of it as well as herself. She loved
every body, was interested in every body’s happiness, quicksighted to
every body’s merits; thought herself a most fortunate creature, and
surrounded with blessings in such an excellent mother, and so many good
neighbours and friends, and a home that wanted for nothing. CHAPTER XXV. _Robert_ Ferrars.”

“Mrs. They were visited on their first settling by almost all their relations
and friends. They were off; and Emma could
breathe. Woodhouse could not be soon reconciled; but the worst was overcome,
the idea was given; time and continual repetition must do the rest.—To
Emma’s entreaties and assurances succeeded Mr. in places
you see it is dreadfully dirty; and the wainscot is more yellow and
forlorn than any thing I could have imagined.”

“My dear, you are too particular,” said her husband. I will not open the window here; it would give you all cold;
but I can go into my mother’s room you know. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield
brought the following note for Elizabeth:--

     /* NIND “My dearest Lizzie, */

     “I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be
     imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. Kitty and
Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. If Mr. No difficulty arose on either
side in the agreement; and she waited only for the disposal of her
effects at Norland, and to determine her future household, before she
set off for the west; and this, as she was exceedingly rapid in the
performance of everything that interested her, was soon done.—The
horses which were left her by her husband had been sold soon after his
death, and an opportunity now offering of disposing of her carriage,
she agreed to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her eldest
daughter. In fact, it does not concern
you—it concerns only myself,—that is, we hope.—Humph!—In short, my dear
Emma, there is no occasion to be so uneasy about it. I shall just go round by Mrs. A degree or two lower, and a creditable appearance might interest
me; I might hope to be useful to their families in some way or other. This moment, if you please. Oh! This conviction, though not entirely satisfactory, gave her
pleasure, and she continued her letter with greater alacrity. With her children they were in continual raptures,
extolling their beauty, courting their notice, and humouring their
whims; and such of their time as could be spared from the importunate
demands which this politeness made on it, was spent in admiration of
whatever her ladyship was doing, if she happened to be doing any thing,
or in taking patterns of some elegant new dress, in which her
appearance the day before had thrown them into unceasing delight. Let me not suppose
that she dares go about, Emma Woodhouse-ing me!—But upon my honour,
there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that woman’s tongue!”

Emma had not to listen to such paradings again—to any so exclusively
addressed to herself—so disgustingly decorated with a “dear Miss
Woodhouse.” The change on Mrs. Elton, and seated by Mr. Reflection
must be reserved for solitary hours: whenever she was alone, she gave
way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a
solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of
unpleasant recollections. Miss Lucas
perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and
instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. Don’t palm all
your abuses of language upon me.”

“There now; you see how droll he is. I thought it very
well done of him indeed. Though Mr. Her second duty now, inferior only to her father’s claims,
was to promote Harriet’s comfort, and endeavour to prove her own
affection in some better method than by match-making. She was not sorry. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother’s being an
inmate of Mr. She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others: there was a
solidity in his reflections which often struck her; and though by no
means so clever as herself, she thought that, if encouraged to read and
improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very
agreeable companion. “I am by no means of opinion, I assure you,” said he, “that a ball of
this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people, can
have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing
myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair
cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of
soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially; a
preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right
cause, and not to any disrespect for her.”

Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. “We may as well leave them by themselves, you know,” said her mother as
soon as she was in the hall. CHAPTER VI


After being long fed with hopes of a speedy visit from Mr. I
saw her there whenever I could, and after the death of my brother,
(which happened about five years ago, and which left to me the
possession of the family property,) she visited me at Delaford. Darcy’s, but you shall do as you choose.”

It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane. Collins!”

“My dear madam,” replied he, “let us be for ever silent on this point. The like reserve prevailed on other topics. He was no dancer in general. They owed to him their
two or three politest puzzles; and the joy and exultation with which at
last he recalled, and rather sentimentally recited, that well-known
charade,

My first doth affliction denote,
    Which my second is destin’d to feel
And my whole is the best antidote
    That affliction to soften and heal.—


made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had transcribed it some
pages ago already. Oh,
barbarously insolent!—Elinor, can he be justified?”

“No, Marianne, in no possible way.”

“And yet this woman—who knows what her art may have been?—how long it
may have been premeditated, and how deeply contrived by her!—Who is
she?—Who can she be?—Whom did I ever hear him talk of as young and
attractive among his female acquaintance?—Oh! Had his own happiness, however, been
the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in
whatever manner he thought best; but her sister’s was involved in it, as
she thought he must be sensible himself. Churchill, which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world.”

“My Emma!” replied Mrs. Emma had no longer an alarm for Henry; his interest was yet safe; and
she led off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment. Perry was uneasy about her. Her mind was inevitably at liberty; her thoughts could not be
chained elsewhere; and the past and the future, on a subject so
interesting, must be before her, must force her attention, and engross
her memory, her reflection, and her fancy. It was a delightful visit;—perfect, in being much too short. and I had almost
forgotten one idea that occurred to me—this pianoforte that has been
sent here by somebody—though we have all been so well satisfied to
consider it a present from the Campbells, may it not be from Mr. Collins
should be in possession of the Longbourn estate, it would be highly
expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at St. Well, I
went, left all that I loved, and went to those to whom, at best, I was
only indifferent. Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing, that, perhaps,
at first accidentally meeting, the vanity of the one had been so worked
on by the flattery of the other, as to lead by degrees to all the rest. “What! I was a kinder friend than
you deserved. CHAPTER IV


A very few days had passed after this adventure, when Harriet came one
morning to Emma with a small parcel in her hand, and after sitting down
and hesitating, thus began:

“Miss Woodhouse—if you are at leisure—I have something that I should
like to tell you—a sort of confession to make—and then, you know, it
will be over.”

Emma was a good deal surprized; but begged her to speak. His affection
for her soon sunk into indifference: hers lasted a little longer; and,
in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to
reputation which her marriage had given her. Remember how few minutes I was at
Randalls, and in how bewildered, how mad a state: and I am not much
better yet; still insane either from happiness or misery. Why should they not go on to Scotland, if that had been the
case?”

“In the first place,” replied Mr. Elton are one as clever as the
other. Dixon has persuaded her father and mother to
come over and see her directly. Elinor, I am
miserable, indeed,” before her voice was entirely lost in sobs. He insisted, moreover, on conveying all their letters to and from
the post for them, and would not be denied the satisfaction of sending
them his newspaper every day. why does he
not look at me? I mean to offer some kind of
explanation, some kind of apology, for the past; to open my whole heart
to you, and by convincing you, that though I have been always a
blockhead, I have not been always a rascal, to obtain something like
forgiveness from Ma— from your sister.”

“Is this the real reason of your coming?”

“Upon my soul it is,”—was his answer, with a warmth which brought all
the former Willoughby to her remembrance, and in spite of herself made
her think him sincere. I must have given you up.”

“Dear me!—How should I ever have borne it! For a few moments every one was silent. She feared it was a
strengthening regard. “I wonder what they are
all doing—whether his sisters know—if he is unhappy, they will be
unhappy too. As to his going, it was inevitable. It would be almost beginning their life of civility
again. All that I had to do, was to avoid you both. My faults, according to this
calculation, are heavy indeed! Mrs. Her sister, though comparatively but little removed by matrimony, being
settled in London, only sixteen miles off, was much beyond her daily
reach; and many a long October and November evening must be struggled
through at Hartfield, before Christmas brought the next visit from
Isabella and her husband, and their little children, to fill the house,
and give her pleasant society again. I am sure your mother can spare you very well, and I _do_
beg you will favour me with your company, for I’ve quite set my heart
upon it. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by
refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise. “Oh, Lizzy! “They aimed at wounding more than Harriet,” said he. “Having understood as much, I was rather astonished to find her so very
lady-like! Jenkinson were sitting. For _him_ she felt much
compassion;—for Lucy very little—and it cost her some pains to procure
that little;—for the rest of the party none at all. It needed all
Jane’s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable
tranquillity. Elton, laughing, “we shall see.”

Emma, finding her so determined upon neglecting her music, had nothing
more to say; and, after a moment’s pause, Mrs. My daughter and my
nephew are formed for each other. She got up to examine them. In
talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. They returned, therefore, in good
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
were the principal inhabitants. The
law was allowed to be genteel enough; many young men, who had chambers
in the Temple, made a very good appearance in the first circles, and
drove about town in very knowing gigs. A thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you have
ever shewn me, and ten thousand for the attentions your heart will
dictate towards her.—If you think me in a way to be happier than I
deserve, I am quite of your opinion.—Miss W. Sir John, could not have thought it possible. Her manners had all the elegance which her
husband’s wanted. I am glad
he is gone. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Wickham had accepted their uncle’s invitation, and was then in
the house. The marriage of Lieut. “Mr. Knightley had spoken
prophetically, when he once said, “Emma, you have been no friend to
Harriet Smith.”—She was afraid she had done her nothing but
disservice.—It was true that she had not to charge herself, in this
instance as in the former, with being the sole and original author of
the mischief; with having suggested such feelings as might otherwise
never have entered Harriet’s imagination; for Harriet had acknowledged
her admiration and preference of Frank Churchill before she had ever
given her a hint on the subject; but she felt completely guilty of
having encouraged what she might have repressed. Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience
generally is. “I wish to assure you both,” said she, “that I see every thing—as you
can desire me to do.”

Mrs. [Illustration]

Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. what a
taking poor Mr. I am sure Miss Nash would—for
Miss Nash thinks her own sister very well married, and it is only a
linen-draper.”

“One should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the teacher
of a school, Harriet. After a short silence which succeeded the first surprise and enquiries
of meeting, Marianne asked Edward if he came directly from London. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. I was sure it could
not be far off; but I had put my huswife upon it, you see, without
being aware, and so it was quite hid, but I had it in my hand so very
lately that I was almost sure it must be on the table. They think
themselves secure, you do no more than what is expected, and it raises
no gratitude at all. and have you actually found happiness in
treasuring up these things?”

“Yes, simpleton as I was!—but I am quite ashamed of it now, and wish I
could forget as easily as I can burn them. What! She appeared to me to play well, that is, with
considerable taste, but I know nothing of the matter myself.—I am
excessively fond of music, but without the smallest skill or right of
judging of any body’s performance.—I have been used to hear her’s
admired; and I remember one proof of her being thought to play well:—a
man, a very musical man, and in love with another woman—engaged to
her—on the point of marriage—would yet never ask that other woman to
sit down to the instrument, if the lady in question could sit down
instead—never seemed to like to hear one if he could hear the other. [Illustration:

     “he never failed to inform them”
]

The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week;
and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one
card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart
of the first. “There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart,” said she afterwards
to herself. “You may believe how glad we all were to see them,” added Mrs. The good news quickly spread through the house; and with proportionate
speed through the neighbourhood. It depends entirely upon his aunt’s spirits and pleasure; in
short, upon her temper. I had not thought of it before, but
that is the best way. Mrs. Elizabeth merely
courtesied to him, without saying a word. The prospect in front was more extensive; it commanded
the whole of the valley, and reached into the country beyond. “To be sure,” said she, “it is better than parting with fifteen hundred
pounds at once. how poor they will be! Bennet instantly answered,--

“Oh dear! Why,
Colonel Brandon’s only object is to be of use to Mr. I
wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it. Elinor now found the difference between the expectation of an
unpleasant event, however certain the mind may be told to consider it,
and certainty itself. In a few moments Marianne did
the same. Gardiner. Mr. Papa is only speaking his own regret.”

“Very much to the honour of both,” was the handsome reply. Jennings’s last illness, and what he said to his
wife a few minutes before he died. Collins, and I will never see you again
if you _do_.”

Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning;
but Mrs. In his present
behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure;
for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those attentions which
had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after
what had since passed, to provoke her. Did you ever
see their equals? On his side were the inquiries,—“Was she a
horsewoman?—Pleasant rides?—Pleasant walks?—Had they a large
neighbourhood?—Highbury, perhaps, afforded society enough?—There were
several very pretty houses in and about it.—Balls—had they balls?—Was
it a musical society?”

But when satisfied on all these points, and their acquaintance
proportionably advanced, he contrived to find an opportunity, while
their two fathers were engaged with each other, of introducing his
mother-in-law, and speaking of her with so much handsome praise, so
much warm admiration, so much gratitude for the happiness she secured
to his father, and her very kind reception of himself, as was an
additional proof of his knowing how to please—and of his certainly
thinking it worth while to try to please her. Your marrying
will be equal to the match at Randalls. Only think what a miserable summer else we shall
have!”

“Yes,” thought Elizabeth; “_that_ would be a delightful scheme, indeed,
and completely do for us at once. John Knightley came—I think the
very evening.—Do not you remember his cutting his finger with your new
penknife, and your recommending court-plaister?—But, as you had none
about you, and knew I had, you desired me to supply him; and so I took
mine out and cut him a piece; but it was a great deal too large, and he
cut it smaller, and kept playing some time with what was left, before
he gave it back to me. Darcy, the gardener’s expression of surprise, on
beholding his master, must immediately have told it. I know where you spent the morning.”

Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, “Where, pray?”

“Did not you know,” said Willoughby, “that we had been out in my
curricle?”

“Yes, yes, Mr. “They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to
take us all there for the summer! Oh! The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their
journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn. You pass it over very handsomely—but you
were perfectly right.”

“I was not quite impartial in my judgment, Emma:—but yet, I think—had
_you_ not been in the case—I should still have distrusted him.”

When he came to Miss Woodhouse, he was obliged to read the whole of it
aloud—all that related to her, with a smile; a look; a shake of the
head; a word or two of assent, or disapprobation; or merely of love, as
the subject required; concluding, however, seriously, and, after steady
reflection, thus—

“Very bad—though it might have been worse.—Playing a most dangerous
game. My dear sir, you are too obliging. The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park was lengthened far beyond
what the first invitation implied. In spite of his being allowed once more to live, however, he did not
feel the continuance of his existence secure, till he had revealed his
present engagement; for the publication of that circumstance, he
feared, might give a sudden turn to his constitution, and carry him off
as rapidly as before. You think you carry it off very well, I dare say, but
with you it is a sort of bravado, an air of affected unconcern; I
always observe it whenever I meet you under those circumstances. She had
been often remiss, her conscience told her so; remiss, perhaps, more in
thought than fact; scornful, ungracious. “They had already spent a week in this manner in Conduit
Street, and Lady Middleton could not be displeased at their giving the
same number of days to such near relations.”

Fanny paused a moment, and then, with fresh vigor, said,

“My love, I would ask them with all my heart, if it was in my power. What Edward had done to forfeit the right of eldest son, might have
puzzled many people to find out; and what Robert had done to succeed to
it, might have puzzled them still more. It would have
grieved me to lose your acquaintance, which must have been the
consequence of your marrying Mr. You will soon, I earnestly hope,
know her thoroughly yourself.—No description can describe her. No!—(in an accent meant to be
insinuating)—I am sure you have seen and understood me.”

It would be impossible to say what Emma felt, on hearing this—which of
all her unpleasant sensations was uppermost. Ferrars’s declaring he would not have Lucy, for it
is no such thing I can tell you; and it is quite a shame for such
ill-natured reports to be spread abroad. [Illustration]

The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases; and again, during the
chief of the day, was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Is
it true, pray? Elton and Miss Hawkins.”

“When I have seen Mr. Weston for my feelings,”
said Emma; “were you to guess her to be _eighteen_, I should listen
with pleasure; but _she_ would be ready to quarrel with you for using
such words. My playing is no more like her’s,
than a lamp is like sunshine.”

“Oh! She wished he
could love a ballroom better, and could like Frank Churchill better.—He
seemed often observing her. It was one of the agreeable recollections of the ball, which
she walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy.—She was extremely
glad that they had come to so good an understanding respecting the
Eltons, and that their opinions of both husband and wife were so much
alike; and his praise of Harriet, his concession in her favour, was
peculiarly gratifying. Nothing was wanting but to be happy when they got there. Not regret her leaving Highbury for the sake of marrying a man
whom I could never admit as an acquaintance of my own! They gave themselves up wholly to their
sorrow, seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection that could
afford it, and resolved against ever admitting consolation in future. I never happened to see them together,
or I am sure I should have found it out directly. You will find Margaret
so improved when you come back again! Jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud as she could, and
continued her account of their surprise, the evening before, on seeing
their friends, without ceasing till every thing was told. Those soft blue eyes, and all those
natural graces, should not be wasted on the inferior society of
Highbury and its connexions. See the consequence of keeping you
company!—What do you say to it?”

“Mr. Depend
upon it, he would not like to have his charade slighted, much better
than his passion. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr. Woodhouse taken from Hartfield!—No, he felt that it ought not to be
attempted. “I have very little to say for my own conduct.—I was tempted by his
attentions, and allowed myself to appear pleased.—An old story,
probably—a common case—and no more than has happened to hundreds of my
sex before; and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who sets up
as I do for Understanding. Woodhouse’s mind.—It was agreed upon,
as what was to be; and every body by whom he was used to be guided
assuring him that it would be for his happiness; and having some
feelings himself which almost admitted it, he began to think that some
time or other—in another year or two, perhaps—it might not be so very
bad if the marriage did take place. Elton, if not towards William Larkins. Can there be any other opinion on the
subject?”

“Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. I am sure your mother will not object to it; for I
have had such good luck in getting my own children off my hands that
she will think me a very fit person to have the charge of you; and if I
don’t get one of you at least well married before I have done with you,
it shall not be my fault. Churchill, and only wishing him not to delay coming
back beyond the next morning early; but that Mr. That would be so very painful a conclusion of their present
acquaintance! Wingfield, she was
quite eager to have Harriet under her care.—When it was thus settled on
her sister’s side, Emma proposed it to her friend, and found her very
persuadable.—Harriet was to go; she was invited for at least a
fortnight; she was to be conveyed in Mr. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! So that, in fact, you see,
if people do but know how to set about it, every comfort may be as well
enjoyed in a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling.”

Elinor agreed to it all, for she did not think he deserved the
compliment of rational opposition. You may
guess, after all these expenses, how very far we must be from being
rich, and how acceptable Mrs. If I had my senses about me I might have called in
Conduit Street in my way home, and told them of it. His expensiveness is
acknowledged even by himself, and his whole conduct declares that
self-denial is a word hardly understood by him. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a
part of London! Ferrars is one of the most
affectionate mothers in the world.”

Elinor was silent. Lord, I have been as busy as a bee ever since dinner! Bingley
was obliged to be in town the following day, and consequently unable to
accept the honour of their invitation, etc. I could have
wished, however, as you know, that you had seen Mr. Denny had
brought him from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant’s
commission in the ----shire. But—that he should talk of encouragement, should consider her as aware
of his views, accepting his attentions, meaning (in short), to marry
him!—should suppose himself her equal in connexion or mind!—look down
upon her friend, so well understanding the gradations of rank below
him, and be so blind to what rose above, as to fancy himself shewing no
presumption in addressing her!—It was most provoking. Churchill
at Enscombe, it is settled. In revolving Lady Catherine’s expressions, however, she could not help
feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting
in this interference. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by
his coming. Knightley, however, shewed no triumphant happiness. “The conduct of neither, if strictly
examined, will be irreproachable; but since then we have both, I hope,
improved in civility.”

“I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. Now, though at first she
will suffer much, I am sure she will soon become easier. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood
since you went away. And I must say
that Lucy’s crossness not to take them along with them in the chaise is
worse than all. When they
had gained their own room, Jane, taking out her letter, said, “This is
from Caroline Bingley: what it contains has surprised me a good deal. Dashwood could penetrate, and at last, without saying a word, quitted
the room, and walked out towards the village—leaving the others in the
greatest astonishment and perplexity on a change in his situation, so
wonderful and so sudden;—a perplexity which they had no means of
lessening but by their own conjectures. Bates’s
knitting, she added, in a half whisper,

“I mentioned no _names_, you will observe.—Oh! Bingley, in consequence of it, before
_they_ did. Mr. With an alacrity beyond the common
impulse of a spirit which yet was never indifferent to the credit of
doing every thing well and attentively, with the real good-will of a
mind delighted with its own ideas, did she then do all the honours of
the meal, and help and recommend the minced chicken and scalloped
oysters, with an urgency which she knew would be acceptable to the
early hours and civil scruples of their guests. I assure you it has been the greatest satisfaction,
comfort, and delight to me, to hear what a musical society I am got
into. Wickham’s attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Greatness will not make me so.”

“Strange that it would!” cried Marianne. do the children grow? Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham’s
removal from the ----shire, as clearly as Mr. When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley
began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Now she could hear more; and
she trembled in expectation of it. Collins, she could not help asking
him whether he intended to accept Mr. Mrs. Sir John never came to the Dashwoods without either inviting them to
dine at the park the next day, or to drink tea with them that evening. “How often did I wish,” added he, “when I was at Allenham this time
twelvemonth, that Barton cottage were inhabited! Bennet, with civil
self-command, to Miss Lucas. Miss Smith, pray take care. The house was large and
handsome; and the Middletons lived in a style of equal hospitality and
elegance. I am so sorry we cannot stay longer; however we shall meet again
in town very soon, I hope.”

They were obliged to put an end to such an expectation. Every body
last night said how well you played.”

“Those who knew any thing about it, must have felt the difference. Her Ladyship was highly incensed. And Lucy perhaps at first might
think only of procuring his good offices in my favour. Mr. Donwell Lane
is never dusty, and now it is perfectly dry. There could be no conversation in the noise of
Mrs. “If _I_
should ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia.”

“_You_ go to Brighton! John
Knightley. Perry walking hastily by, Mr. “I cannot make speeches, Emma:” he soon resumed; and in a tone of such
sincere, decided, intelligible tenderness as was tolerably
convincing.—“If I loved you less, I might be able to talk about it
more. [Illustration]

Had Elizabeth’s opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could
not have formed a very pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic
comfort. And as to my dear little boys, I must say, that
if Aunt Emma has not time for them, I do not think they would fare much
better with Uncle Knightley, who is absent from home about five hours
where she is absent one—and who, when he is at home, is either reading
to himself or settling his accounts.”

Mr. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. I never saw Lucy in such a rage in my life. Jennings’s notice. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others
were to meet us at the church. CHAPTER XVIII


Mr. With a faint blush, she presently
replied,

“Such attentions as Mrs. Five couple are nothing, when one thinks seriously about it. At
last it was all settled, even to the destination of the parcel. Mrs. But of his minuter propensities, as you call them you have from
peculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself. If any
thing, you are too attentive. I always say a woman
cannot have too many resources—and I feel very thankful that I have so
many myself as to be quite independent of society.”

“Frank was here in February for a fortnight.”

“So I remember to have heard. Martin. Our plain
manner of living, our small rooms, and few domestics, and the little we
see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like
yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,
and that we have done everything in our power to prevent you spending
your time unpleasantly.”

Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. Mrs. Observe the turn of her
throat. well, that must be infinitely provoking! Goddard’s; Mr. He is the most fearful of giving
pain, of wounding expectation, and the most incapable of being selfish,
of any body I ever saw. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. No, she had had enough of
interference. On every formal visit a child ought to be of
the party, by way of provision for discourse. Churchill is
ordered, or has ordered herself, to spend in some warmer place than
Enscombe—in short, to spend in London; so that we have the agreeable
prospect of frequent visits from Frank the whole spring—precisely the
season of the year which one should have chosen for it: days almost at
the longest; weather genial and pleasant, always inviting one out, and
never too hot for exercise. That is, I _presume_ it to be so on her side, and I
can _answer_ for its being so on his. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham’s desertion, and
complimented her on bearing it so well. Lucy spoke first. and Mrs. “We will not allow her to do such a thing again:”—and nodding
significantly—“there must be some arrangement made, there must indeed. In general, it was a very well approved match. Weston, with all my heart, on the prospect of having one of
the most lovely and accomplished young women in England for your
daughter.”

A glance or two between him and his wife, convinced him that all was as
right as this speech proclaimed; and its happy effect on his spirits
was immediate. A most welcome negative followed the last question; and her
alarms being now removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of
curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the
next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and
with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike
to the scheme. Mr. She was debating within herself on the eligibility
of beginning her story directly, or postponing it till Marianne were in
stronger health;—and they crept on for a few minutes in silence. Weston, “have not you finished it yet? “Here comes Marianne,” cried Sir John. Collins’s
character, connections, and situation in life, I am convinced that my
chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on
entering the marriage state.”

Elizabeth quietly answered “undoubtedly;” and, after an awkward pause,
they returned to the rest of the family. Mary always has her own way.”

“And now,” silently conjectured Elinor, “she will write to Combe by
this day’s post.”

But if she _did_, the letter was written and sent away with a privacy
which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the fact. For their
own comfort they would much rather have remained, at least all the
morning, in Mrs. I believe I have now told you everything. Jenkinson, who lives with them. CHAPTER XI


“Harriet, poor Harriet!”—Those were the words; in them lay the
tormenting ideas which Emma could not get rid of, and which constituted
the real misery of the business to her. The mother’s consternation was
excessive; but it could not surpass the alarm of the Miss Steeles, and
every thing was done by all three, in so critical an emergency, which
affection could suggest as likely to assuage the agonies of the little
sufferer. Rose at Exeter, a prodigious smart young man, quite a beau, clerk
to Mr. there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with Mr. The independence she settled on Robert, through
resentment against you, has put it in his power to make his own choice;
and she has actually been bribing one son with a thousand a-year, to do
the very deed which she disinherited the other for intending to do. My character has ever been
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness; and in a cause of such
moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. Their other aunt also
visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of
cheering and heartening them up--though, as she never came without
reporting some fresh instance of Wickham’s extravagance or irregularity,
she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found
them. “I do not ask you to come in the morning, for we must
walk to the park, to call on Lady Middleton.”

He engaged to be with them by four o’clock. Every body had a degree of
gravity and sorrow; tenderness towards the departed, solicitude for the
surviving friends; and, in a reasonable time, curiosity to know where
she would be buried. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. She did
her best when thus called on, by speaking of Lady Middleton with more
warmth than she felt, though with far less than Miss Lucy. One or two meetings of this kind had taken place, without affording
Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy in private, when Sir John called at
the cottage one morning, to beg, in the name of charity, that they
would all dine with Lady Middleton that day, as he was obliged to
attend the club at Exeter, and she would otherwise be quite alone,
except her mother and the two Miss Steeles. I am confident that she would have
performed delightfully. for I think you have
a little cold, and Patty has been washing the kitchen.’—‘Oh! Gardiner, with occasional help from
Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. “It is to be a secret, I conclude,” said he. Gardiner were
engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach of
the whole party. Quite delightful to have you all meet
so!—Our little room so honoured!”

She was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke, and opening the
casement there, immediately called Mr. Weston gently, “very much.”

“She always declares she will never marry, which, of course, means just
nothing at all. Jennings’s style of living, and set of acquaintance, than with her
behaviour to themselves, which was invariably kind. Woodhouse had been always felt in her husband’s plans and her own, for
a marriage between Frank and Emma. “She did not choose it,” said her daughter; “she would go.”

“She is a very fine-looking woman! Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted
very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements. John Knightley lately? Dashwood was denied; but before the carriage could turn from the
house, her husband accidentally came out. Bates, civil and humble as usual, looked as if she did
not quite understand what was going on. We
must consider what Miss Fairfax quits, before we condemn her taste for
what she goes to.”

“You are right, Mrs. Hurst, “running away without
telling us that you were coming out.”

Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. They were forced to conclude, that he had no pleasing intelligence to
send; but even of _that_ they would have been glad to be certain. I know him well. Do not forget your engagement.”

Emma looked graciously. _She_ blushed, and Jane blushed; but the
cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of
colour. It was only the last time they met that
he had offered him one of Folly’s puppies! CHAPTER XXX. Bingley and Netherfield. Marianne was restored to her from
a danger in which, as she now began to feel, her own mistaken judgment
in encouraging the unfortunate attachment to Willoughby, had
contributed to place her;—and in her recovery she had yet another
source of joy unthought of by Elinor. Now was the
moment for her resolution to be executed; and while her courage was
high, she immediately said,--

“Mr. The girls grieved over such a
number of ladies; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing
that, instead of twelve, he had brought only six with him from London,
his five sisters and a cousin. The
cottage seemed to be considered and loved by him as his home; many more
of his hours were spent there than at Allenham; and if no general
engagement collected them at the park, the exercise which called him
out in the morning was almost certain of ending there, where the rest
of the day was spent by himself at the side of Marianne, and by his
favourite pointer at her feet. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself
they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in
time make their past imprudence forgotten.”

“Their conduct has been such,” replied Elizabeth, “as neither you, nor
I, nor anybody, can ever forget. He
did not boast, but it naturally betrayed itself, that he had persuaded
his aunt where his uncle could do nothing, and on her laughing and
noticing it, he owned that he believed (excepting one or two points) he
could _with_ _time_ persuade her to any thing. My friend
Lord Courtland came to me the other day on purpose to ask my advice,
and laid before me three different plans of Bonomi’s. Better than nearer! Weston foretold. Churchill would never get over it.”—Even Mr. I like a job of that sort
excessively.’ I never shall forget his manner. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn
when she was only eight years old. But it is so
strange!”

“Yes, _that_ is what makes it amusing. Eliza had confessed to me, though most
reluctantly, the name of her lover; and when he returned to town, which
was within a fortnight after myself, we met by appointment, he to
defend, I to punish his conduct. I never spent a pleasanter morning in my
life.”

“I am afraid,” replied Elinor, “that the pleasantness of an employment
does not always evince its propriety.”

“On the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof of it, Elinor; for if
there had been any real impropriety in what I did, I should have been
sensible of it at the time, for we always know when we are acting
wrong, and with such a conviction I could have had no pleasure.”

“But, my dear Marianne, as it has already exposed you to some very
impertinent remarks, do you not now begin to doubt the discretion of
your own conduct?”

“If the impertinent remarks of Mrs. “Kitty and I are going upstairs to sit in
my dressing-room.”

Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained
quietly in the hall till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned
into the drawing-room. “Very well,” replied Emma; “a most natural feeling; and the longer it
lasts, the better I shall be pleased. It is Mr. And it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to
     suppose, as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness
     of behaviour in your

     [Illustration:

“To whom I have related the affair”

     [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

     daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though,
     at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. and having to relate such a
thing of his sister! Have you forgot, Marianne, how
many pleasant days we have owed to them?”

“No,” said Marianne, in a low voice, “nor how many painful moments.”

Elinor took no notice of this; and directing her attention to their
visitor, endeavoured to support something like discourse with him, by
talking of their present residence, its conveniences, &c. Bought at Weymouth, you know—Mr. We are rather out of distance of the very
striking beauties which attract the sort of parties you speak of; and
we are a very quiet set of people, I believe; more disposed to stay at
home than engage in schemes of pleasure.”

“Ah! Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton the
day before, not many hours after the express. I thought I should have
fainted. Ferrars’s
resolution that both her sons should marry well, and of the danger
attending any young woman who attempted to _draw him in;_ that Mrs. Your idea of the
ponies is delightful. His mother is
perfectly right not to be in a hurry. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then
talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away from
her, and moving with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte,
stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer’s
countenance. You know I am always ready to pay them any
attention in my power, as my taking them out this evening shows. The
adieu is charity itself. Frank Churchill had rendered you, in protecting you from
the gipsies, was spoken of.”

“Oh! No one could dispute her
right to come; the house was her husband’s from the moment of his
father’s decease; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much the
greater, and to a woman in Mrs. It was possible,
however, that some of his companions in the ----shire might be able to
give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in expecting
it, the application was a something to look forward to. Here again I shall give you pain--to what degree you
only can tell. Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thick
leather gaiters, and either the exertion of getting them together, or
some other cause, brought the colour into his face, as he answered,

“Oh! Miss Bates was very chatty and good-humoured, as she always is, though
she speaks rather too quick. “I am very glad to hear such a good account of her,” said Lady
Catherine; “and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel,
if she does not practise a great deal.”

“I assure you, madam,” he replied, “that she does not need such advice. He
has a most excellent mother. “I am going into the village to see my horses,” said he, “as you are
not yet ready for breakfast; I shall be back again presently.”


Edward returned to them with fresh admiration of the surrounding
country; in his walk to the village, he had seen many parts of the
valley to advantage; and the village itself, in a much higher situation
than the cottage, afforded a general view of the whole, which had
exceedingly pleased him. Mr. There was not much in the question,
nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which
gave them meaning. The most indefatigable, true friend. You are trying not
to smile.”

“I am afraid,” said he, composing his features, “I am very much afraid,
my dear Emma, that you will not smile when you hear it.”

“Indeed! Now, my dear madam, I will release you; but I could not conclude
before. Marianne was in every respect materially better, and he declared her
entirely out of danger. Weston, which every body likes in _him_,
because there is so much good-humour with it—but that would not do to
be copied. It did assist; for though he began
with grave looks and short questions, he was soon led on to talk of
them all in the usual way, and to take the child out of her arms with
all the unceremoniousness of perfect amity. But hush, hush!”

To guess what all this meant, was impossible even for Emma. Who would submit to the indignity of being approved by such a
woman as Lady Middleton and Mrs. Fortunately for him,
Highbury, including Randalls in the same parish, and Donwell Abbey in
the parish adjoining, the seat of Mr. Robert Martin. There were
few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended;
but at the same time there was no one whose knowledge of a sister’s
frailty would have mortified her so much. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly
relieved. “His regard for her, infinitely surpassing anything that Willoughby
ever felt or feigned, as much more warm, as more sincere or
constant—which ever we are to call it—has subsisted through all the
knowledge of dear Marianne’s unhappy prepossession for that worthless
young man!—and without selfishness—without encouraging a hope!—could he
have seen her happy with another—Such a noble mind!—such openness, such
sincerity!—no one can be deceived in _him_.”

“Colonel Brandon’s character,” said Elinor, “as an excellent man, is
well established.”

“I know it is,”—replied her mother seriously, “or after such a warning,
_I_ should be the last to encourage such affection, or even to be
pleased by it. Perry was always particularly fond of my mother—indeed I
do not know who is not—and she had mentioned it to her in confidence;
she had no objection to her telling us, of course, but it was not to go
beyond: and, from that day to this, I never mentioned it to a soul that
I know of. Miss
Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the
first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility,--

“Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire militia removed from Meryton? Look at her. Weston entered into the idea with thorough enjoyment, and Mrs. so far off!—and the
air so bad!”

“No, indeed—_we_ are not at all in a bad air. “We have not quite determined how far it shall carry us,” said Mrs. He has the promise of an
ensigncy in General----’s regiment, now quartered in the north. He was resolutely silent, however; and, from a
determination of making him speak, she continued,--

“I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all
were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect
your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, ‘_She_
a beauty! She could not be alone without feeling
the full weight of their separate claims; and how to guard the comfort
of both to the utmost, was the question. She did not regret it. I thought I had seen you
first in February.”

“Your gallantry is really unanswerable. “Well, Marianne,” said Elinor, as soon as he had left them, “for _one_
morning I think you have done pretty well. The particulars I reserve till we meet. one can’t repeat such kind of
things you know)—she told him directly, she had not the least mind in
the world to be off, for she could live with him upon a trifle, and how
little so ever he might have, she should be very glad to have it all,
you know, or something of the kind. Collins, you
must marry. But _now_ suppose as much as you choose; give a loose to your fancy,
indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will
afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly
err. She was prepared to be wet through, fatigued,
and frightened; but the event was still more unfortunate, for they did
not go at all. After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know
anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that
it was time to be at home. I am sure you will like it of all
things. But as it is--you
must not let your fancy run away with you. I only wonder that I am alive after what I
have suffered for Edward’s sake these last four years. A hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable.”

His wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her consent to this
plan. Knightley, “but he is no complimenter; and though I well know him to
have, likewise, a most brotherly affection for you, he is so far from
making flourishes, that any other young woman might think him rather
cool in her praise. There was certainly no harm in his travelling
sixteen miles twice over on such an errand; but there was an air of
foppery and nonsense in it which she could not approve. Don’t think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you know,
     that I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on _your_
     side. On entering the drawing-room, she found the whole
party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high, she declined it, and making her sister the
excuse, said she would amuse herself, for the short time she could stay
below, with a book. His first proposition and request, that the dance begun at Mr. The subject was continued no farther; and Marianne remained
thoughtfully silent, till a new object suddenly engaged her attention. As I am happily quite an altered
creature in _one_ _respect_, it is very fit that you should have the
satisfaction of knowing it. For a few days, every morning visit in
Highbury included some mention of the handsome letter Mrs. “I have been more pained,” said she, “by her endeavors to acquit him
than by all the rest; for it irritates her mind more than the most
perfect conviction of his unworthiness can do. It was not so very bad. Elton’s civilities were dreadfully ill-timed;
but she had the comfort of appearing very polite, while feeling very
cross—and of thinking that the rest of the visit could not possibly
pass without bringing forward the same information again, or the
substance of it, from the open-hearted Mr. When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. I feel it so very due. It was evident that she was
much better acquainted with Mr. Elinor, this eldest daughter, whose advice was so effectual, possessed
a strength of understanding, and coolness of judgment, which qualified
her, though only nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother, and
enabled her frequently to counteract, to the advantage of them all,
that eagerness of mind in Mrs. As for your Elizabeth’s picture, you must not attempt to have it
taken, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?”

“It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression; but their
colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be
copied.”

At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Darcy
returned within the stated time. And now to be so
rewarded! God knows, I have been a
very indifferent lover.—But you understand me.—Yes, you see, you
understand my feelings—and will return them if you can. Elton’s would be depressed when he knew her state; and left her at
last tolerably comfortable, in the sweet dependence of his having a
most comfortless visit, and of their all missing her very much. She left to my care her only child, a little
girl, the offspring of her first guilty connection, who was then about
three years old. I hate to see you
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. Mrs. Bates, and appearing to attend to the good old lady’s replies, she
saw her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which
she had apparently been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax, and return it
into the purple and gold reticule by her side, saying, with significant
nods,

“We can finish this some other time, you know. And as it is—only half
blood!—But you have such a generous spirit!”

“I would not wish to do any thing mean,” he replied. With such a reward for her tears, the child was too wise to
cease crying. Ladies and
gentlemen, I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse (who, wherever she is,
presides) to say, that she desires to know what you are all thinking
of?”

Some laughed, and answered good-humouredly. Come on a donkey, however,
if you prefer it. Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me,—it is
worth the trial however, and you shall hear every thing. The Westons will be with us, and it will be quite delightful. John Knightley returning from the daily visit to Donwell, with his two
eldest boys, whose healthy, glowing faces shewed all the benefit of a
country run, and seemed to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton
and rice pudding they were hastening home for. I ought not to have said a word about it. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who
often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Mr. Weston would take no
denial; they must all dine at Randalls one day;—even Mr. Her many attractions were again dwelt on; and Caroline
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict
the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former
letter. No wonder. You will hardly bear to
be long outdone by Jane. If I draw less, I shall read
more; if I give up music, I shall take to carpet-work. She could not yet recover from the
surprise of what had happened: it was impossible to think of anything
else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved soon after
breakfast to indulge herself in air and exercise. If we feel for the wretched, enough to do all we
can for them, the rest is empty sympathy, only distressing to
ourselves.”

Harriet could just answer, “Oh! These amazing engagements of mine—what
have they been? He takes them now for people of
fashion.”

The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their
relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore
it; and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he
could from such disgraceful companions. He has not been able to get the Romance of the Forest yet. But it was a matter of great consolation to her, that what brought evil
to herself would bring good to her sister; and Elinor, on the other
hand, suspecting that it would not be in her power to avoid Edward
entirely, comforted herself by thinking, that though their longer stay
would therefore militate against her own happiness, it would be better
for Marianne than an immediate return into Devonshire. I expected to find a more
reasonable young woman. Sir William did not say much. You supposed more than really existed. Lydia laughed, and said,--

“Ay, that is just like your formality and discretion. Philips. “Ah!—Indeed I am very sorry.—Come, shake hands with me.”

This had just taken place and with great cordiality, when John
Knightley made his appearance, and “How d’ye do, George?” and “John,
how are you?” succeeded in the true English style, burying under a
calmness that seemed all but indifference, the real attachment which
would have led either of them, if requisite, to do every thing for the
good of the other. She was not
doomed, however, to be long in ignorance of his measures. Miss Woodhouse,
why are you always so right?”

“Indeed, I am very sorry to be right in this instance. She thought so well of the letter, that when Mr. Two such could
never be granted. Jennings, “that is _her_ revenge. She
was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after stating her
imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed the knowledge of it to
herself. and
his wife’s persuading him to it, out of care for his health—just what
will happen, I have no doubt, some time or other; only a little
premature. After they had been assembled about an
hour, Mr. The
treachery, or the folly, of my cousin’s maid betrayed us. She had been watching him the last hour,
she said, as he walked up and down the street,--and had Mr. She had hurried on before her guests to
prepare her father for their appearance, and was beyond the reach of
Mr. Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr. Elton is very good-natured and agreeable, and I dare say
her acquaintance are just what they ought to be. You must not judge of him, Miss Dashwood,
from _your_ slight acquaintance. She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked
up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of
inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse. Why they _were_ different, Robert
explained to her himself in the course of a quarter of an hour’s
conversation; for, talking of his brother, and lamenting the extreme
_gaucherie_ which he really believed kept him from mixing in proper
society, he candidly and generously attributed it much less to any
natural deficiency, than to the misfortune of a private education;
while he himself, though probably without any particular, any material
superiority by nature, merely from the advantage of a public school,
was as well fitted to mix in the world as any other man. His appearance however was not unpleasing, in spite of his
being in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret an absolute old bachelor,
for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty; but though his face
was not handsome, his countenance was sensible, and his address was
particularly gentlemanlike. I should not have thought it possible you could forget what
passed in this very room about court-plaister, one of the very last
times we ever met in it!—It was but a very few days before I had my
sore throat—just before Mr. I am sure she saw me, but she looked away directly, and took
no notice; and they both went to quite the farther end of the shop; and
I kept sitting near the door!—Oh! No coffee, I
thank you, for me—never take coffee.—A little tea if you please, sir,
by and bye,—no hurry—Oh! Her flattery had already subdued the pride of Lady
Middleton, and made an entry into the close heart of Mrs. I have
the pleasure, madam, (to Mrs. My father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me than
what you say. She
questioned him as to the society in Yorkshire—the extent of the
neighbourhood about Enscombe, and the sort; and could make out from his
answers that, as far as Enscombe was concerned, there was very little
going on, that their visitings were among a range of great families,
none very near; and that even when days were fixed, and invitations
accepted, it was an even chance that Mrs. and Mrs. Woodhouse had been exceedingly
well amused. “Such a fortnight as it has been!” he continued; “every day more
precious and more delightful than the day before!—every day making me
less fit to bear any other place. Ashamed of being otherwise. I am
only afraid of your sitting up for me. After a mutual silence of
some minutes, Harriet thus began again—

“I do so wonder, Miss Woodhouse, that you should not be married, or
going to be married! They could
have been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the
same. “Oh! She
believed he was very clever, and understood every thing. “I shall hear about you all,” said he; “that is my chief consolation. He never read the Romance of the Forest, nor The
Children of the Abbey. He told her that he had been impatient to leave the dining-room—hated
sitting long—was always the first to move when he could—that his
father, Mr. His answer
to this sudden attack was delightful to her mother’s ear. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far;
and she listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added,
“I have never had a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him
ever since he was four years old.”

This was praise of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her
ideas. In ran Mrs. The card-table was then placed, and Elinor
began to wonder at herself for having ever entertained a hope of
finding time for conversation at the park. Her voice was
not unsteady; but her mind was in all the perturbation that such a
development of self, such a burst of threatening evil, such a confusion
of sudden and perplexing emotions, must create.—She listened with much
inward suffering, but with great outward patience, to Harriet’s
detail.—Methodical, or well arranged, or very well delivered, it could
not be expected to be; but it contained, when separated from all the
feebleness and tautology of the narration, a substance to sink her
spirit—especially with the corroborating circumstances, which her own
memory brought in favour of Mr. That he should even speak to
her was amazing!--but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her
family! James’s, Sir William was so completely
awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage
enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word;
and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge
of her chair, not knowing which way to look. But Mrs. His mother explained to him her liberal
designs, in case of his marrying Miss Morton; told him she would settle
on him the Norfolk estate, which, clear of land-tax, brings in a good
thousand a-year; offered even, when matters grew desperate, to make it
twelve hundred; and in opposition to this, if he still persisted in
this low connection, represented to him the certain penury that must
attend the match. Certainly his being at Randalls had given great spirit to the
last two weeks—indescribable spirit; the idea, the expectation of
seeing him which every morning had brought, the assurance of his
attentions, his liveliness, his manners! The gentleman offered his
services; and perceiving that her modesty declined what her situation
rendered necessary, took her up in his arms without farther delay, and
carried her down the hill. This was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted
only regimentals to make him completely charming. The matter itself I
could not deny, and vain was every endeavour to soften it. Gardiner’s curiosity; it was
not their wish to force her communication. Palmer’s sympathy was shown in procuring all the
particulars in her power of the approaching marriage, and communicating
them to Elinor. Elton!—no wonder that you have such a
curiosity to see him.”

Jane’s curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as wholly to
occupy her. I really am ashamed of always leading the way.”

Jane’s solicitude about fetching her own letters had not escaped Emma. He does not care about Jane Fairfax. Well, I am convinced
that there is a vast deal of inconsistency in almost every human
character. Willoughby at Cleveland, and whether
they were intimately acquainted with him. Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits and happy looks. Collins first came to Hunsford.”

“I believe she did--and I am sure she could not have bestowed her
kindness on a more grateful object.”

“Mr. “We did, indeed, particularly so when he first arrived.”

“I begged him to exert himself for fear you should suspect what was the
matter; but it made him so melancholy, not being able to stay more than
a fortnight with us, and seeing me so much affected. Mr. I earnestly pressed his coming to us, and should
not be surprised to see him walk in today or tomorrow, or any day.”

This was gaining something, something to look forward to. Knightley certainly had
not done him justice. He left
Netherfield for London on the day following, as you, I am certain,
remember, with the design of soon returning. You think so, do not you?”

“I hope I am aware that they may be too noisy for your father—or even
may be some encumbrance to you, if your visiting engagements continue
to increase as much as they have done lately.”

“Increase!”

“Certainly; you must be sensible that the last half-year has made a
great difference in your way of life.”

“Difference! When we talked about him, it was as clear as
possible.”

“Not quite,” returned Emma, with forced calmness, “for all that you
then said, appeared to me to relate to a different person. But what is the
meaning of this? Knightley!—How she could dare to fancy herself the chosen of
such a man till actually assured of it!—But Harriet was less humble,
had fewer scruples than formerly.—Her inferiority, whether of mind or
situation, seemed little felt.—She had seemed more sensible of Mr. Darcy
had been overrated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. I
should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.”

“Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,
between the mercenary and the prudent motive? My total
ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”

“You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. He had no reason to wish his hair longer, to conceal any
confusion of face; no reason to wish the money unspent, to improve his
spirits. Collins joining
in, observed,--

“Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine
de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will
be delighted with her. I thought so at the time; but you _would_ give him Cowper.”

“Nay, Mama, if he is not to be animated by Cowper!—but we must allow
for difference of taste. “Oh yes--I understand you perfectly.”

“I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen
through, I am afraid, is pitiful.”

“That is as it happens. I do not know
whether he has any design of ingratiating himself with either of us,
Harriet, by additional softness, but it strikes me that his manners are
softer than they used to be. I was the most
miserable wretch!”

“Not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth. It reminded
her of their first forlorn tête-à-tête, on the evening of Mrs. Sir John
wanted the whole family to walk to the Park directly and look at his
guests. Bingley’s large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their
mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of
an ensign. I am sure, for my part, I should never
have known he _did_ like it better than any other colour, if he had not
happened to say so. Now, however, his good-natured, honest, stupid
soul, full of indignation against me, and concern for your sister,
could not resist the temptation of telling me what he knew ought to,
though probably he did not think it _would_, vex me horridly. Elton
predominated, sometimes the Martins; and each was occasionally useful
as a check to the other. Bingley,” she added; “for when
you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner with
us as soon as you returned. It may be very inconvenient some years to spare a
hundred, or even fifty pounds from our own expenses.”

“I believe you are right, my love; it will be better that there should
be no annuity in the case; whatever I may give them occasionally will
be of far greater assistance than a yearly allowance, because they
would only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of a larger
income, and would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of the
year. But why Mr. “He cannot bear writing, you know,” she continued—“he says it is quite
shocking.”

“No,” said he, “I never said any thing so irrational. Jennings away. My brother had no regard
for her; his pleasures were not what they ought to have been, and from
the first he treated her unkindly. Elton, “what can be the meaning of this?—Miss
Smith!—I never thought of Miss Smith in the whole course of my
existence—never paid her any attentions, but as your friend: never
cared whether she were dead or alive, but as your friend. Here, she must be leading a life of privation and
penance; there it would have been all enjoyment. He came with Mrs. “I must hurry away then, to give him those thanks which you will not
allow me to give _you;_ to assure him that he has made me a very—an
exceedingly happy man.”

Elinor did not offer to detain him; and they parted, with a very
earnest assurance on _her_ side of her unceasing good wishes for his
happiness in every change of situation that might befall him; on _his_,
with rather an attempt to return the same good will, than the power of
expressing it. When you have been here a little longer, Miss Fairfax,
you will understand that Mr. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but
she had known Sir William’s too long. Knightley, he set off, with all the
grateful blessings that she could utter for her friend and herself. Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down
again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command. Mrs. About noon, however, she began—but with a caution—a dread of
disappointment which for some time kept her silent, even to her
friend—to fancy, to hope she could perceive a slight amendment in her
sister’s pulse;—she waited, watched, and examined it again and
again;—and at last, with an agitation more difficult to bury under
exterior calmness, than all her foregoing distress, ventured to
communicate her hopes. A large debt of
gratitude was owing here; but the intercourse of the last seven years,
the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followed
Isabella’s marriage, on their being left to each other, was yet a
dearer, tenderer recollection. Mama, how shall we do without her?”

“My love, it will be scarcely a separation. The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart; and by a
manœuvre of Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to a Lady Catherine. Bennet got
rid of her two most deserving daughters. “I am sure
William Larkins will not like it. A
likeness pleases every body; and Miss Woodhouse’s performances must be
capital. You begged hard to be commanded to
come.”

“Don’t say I was cross. Darcy, and
reading in her neighbours’ looks their equal amazement in beholding it. Even Emma grew tired at
last of flattery and merriment, and wished herself rather walking
quietly about with any of the others, or sitting almost alone, and
quite unattended to, in tranquil observation of the beautiful views
beneath her. I had quite determined to go away again.”

“Yes, you were very cross; and I do not know what about, except that
you were too late for the best strawberries. Elizabeth’s courage did not fail her. Darcy’s explanation
_there_ had appeared very insufficient; and she read it again. Lady Middleton, though in the middle of a rubber, on being informed
that Marianne was unwell, was too polite to object for a moment to her
wish of going away, and making over her cards to a friend, they
departed as soon as the carriage could be found. She was
very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Dashwood feared to
hazard any remark, and ventured not to offer consolation. He remained at Hartfield after all the rest, his thoughts full of what
he had seen; so full, that when the candles came to assist his
observations, he must—yes, he certainly must, as a friend—an anxious
friend—give Emma some hint, ask her some question. Think of your mother; think of her
misery while _you_ suffer: for her sake you must exert yourself.”

“I cannot, I cannot,” cried Marianne; “leave me, leave me, if I
distress you; leave me, hate me, forget me! His affections seemed to reanimate towards them all, and his
interest in their welfare again became perceptible. If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children
must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have
ever had anything from him except a few presents. Bingley.”

“I am sick of Mr. The word was _blunder_; and as Harriet exultingly proclaimed it, there
was a blush on Jane’s cheek which gave it a meaning not otherwise
ostensible. Jennings’s well-meant but ill-judged attentions
to her, this calmness could not have been maintained; but not a
syllable escaped her lips; and the abstraction of her thoughts
preserved her in ignorance of every thing that was passing before her. “Well,” said she to herself, “this is most strange!—After I had got him
off so well, to chuse to go into company, and leave Harriet ill
behind!—Most strange indeed!—But there is, I believe, in many men,
especially single men, such an inclination—such a passion for dining
out—a dinner engagement is so high in the class of their pleasures,
their employments, their dignities, almost their duties, that any thing
gives way to it—and this must be the case with Mr. Well! Lord! It determined him to attempt a reconciliation, though not
exactly in the manner pointed out by their brother and sister. Mr. Anything beyond
the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.”

As he spoke there was a sort of smile, which Elizabeth fancied she
understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and
Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered,--

“I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her
family. (turning to Mrs. This circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl and
the brother of Mrs. His spirits, during the last two
or three days, though still very unequal, were greatly improved—he grew
more and more partial to the house and environs—never spoke of going
away without a sigh—declared his time to be wholly disengaged—even
doubted to what place he should go when he left them—but still, go he
must. That was what happened before tea. Elinor, catching all, and more
than all, his fears in a moment, proposed to call in further advice. I am not equal to
it. Upon my word we shall be absolutely dissipated. Dashwood which must generally have led
to imprudence. The gentlemen spoke of his horse. She joined them sometimes at Sir John’s, sometimes at
her own house; but wherever it was, she always came in excellent
spirits, full of delight and importance, attributing Charlotte’s well
doing to her own care, and ready to give so exact, so minute a detail
of her situation, as only Miss Steele had curiosity enough to desire. Her teeth are
tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which
have sometimes been called so fine, I never could perceive anything
extraordinary in them. “It is Frank and Miss Fairfax,” said Mrs. It was
almost enough to make her think of marrying. “By all means. They then
proceeded a few paces in silence. They met for
the sake of eating, drinking, and laughing together, playing at cards,
or consequences, or any other game that was sufficiently noisy. He heard her with astonishment. “What could have become of Mr. He loves any thing of the sort, and especially any
thing that pays woman a compliment. She continued in very agitating reflections till the sound of Lady
Catherine’s carriage made her feel how unequal she was to encounter
Charlotte’s observation, and hurried her away to her room. The possibility of Colonel
Brandon’s arriving and finding her there, came across her. Smith, to resist the temptation of returning here soon, and yet aware
that by declining your invitation, by saying that he was going away for
some time, he should seem to act an ungenerous, a suspicious part by
our family, he might well be embarrassed and disturbed. What!—engaged to her all the winter—before either of
them came to Highbury?”

“Engaged since October,—secretly engaged.—It has hurt me, Emma, very
much. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.”

“Are you, indeed? I am sorry for it. Oh, that I knew how it was!”

But wishes were vain; or, at best, could serve only to amuse her in the
hurry and confusion of the following hour. If
it be not inconvenient to you, pray let us go in, that I may prove
myself to belong to the place, to be a true citizen of Highbury. “Oh yes--it would be much better to
wait till Jane was well; and by that time, most likely, Captain Carter
would be at Meryton again. Elton; and said, looking so very significantly at her,
“that she did not pretend to understand what his business might be, but
she only knew that any woman whom Mr. [Illustration]

A few days after this visit, Mr. In the country, an
unpremeditated dance was very allowable; but in London, where the
reputation of elegance was more important and less easily attained, it
was risking too much for the gratification of a few girls, to have it
known that Lady Middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine
couple, with two violins, and a mere side-board collation. “Ever hear her!” repeated Emma. What
are we to do?—The year will wear away at this rate, and nothing done. Again they all sat
down, and for a moment or two all were silent; while Marianne was
looking with the most speaking tenderness, sometimes at Edward and
sometimes at Elinor, regretting only that their delight in each other
should be checked by Lucy’s unwelcome presence. He talked of Harriet, and praised her so
warmly, that she could not suppose any thing wanting which a little
time would not add. The Miss Steeles kept their station at
the park, and were to quit it only with the rest of the family. my dear, we cannot begin too early; you are not aware of the
difficulty of procuring exactly the desirable thing.”

“I not aware!” said Jane, shaking her head; “dear Mrs. He
is so excessively handsome! Woodhouse’s fears.—He was very uneasy; and but for the sense of his
son-in-law’s protection, would have been under wretched alarm every
night of his life. He took some music from a chair near the pianoforte,
and turning to Emma, said,

“Here is something quite new to me. Weston would speak to her, with a degree of unreserve
which she would not hazard with Isabella; and, she really believed,
would scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the Churchills from
her, excepting those views on the young man, of which her own
imagination had already given her such instinctive knowledge. Weston were
to marry her,’ and saying it again to yourself every now and then
afterwards, why do you talk of success? who have
often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my
vanity in useless or blameless distrust. But while I visit at Hartfield,
and you are so kind to me, Miss Woodhouse, I am not afraid of what any
body can do.”

“You understand the force of influence pretty well, Harriet; but I
would have you so firmly established in good society, as to be
independent even of Hartfield and Miss Woodhouse. Nothing was wanting on Mrs. Knightley?”

“To be sure I am. Gardiner expressed an
inclination to see the place again. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her
affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already
self-destined to another. But in time they will. Elizabeth found herself
quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her
composedly. My father is going to London with Colonel Forster instantly,
to try to discover her. You know my sentiments.”

“You are then resolved to have him?”

“I have said no such thing. Perry, and Mrs. The corner of the sofa
is very good. A scheme of which every part promises delight can
never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by
the defence of some little peculiar vexation.”

When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely
to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and
always very short. Jennings; how provoking!”

“You are expecting a letter, then?” said Elinor, unable to be longer
silent. His sense of her inferiority, of its being a
degradation, of the family obstacles which judgment had always opposed
to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the
consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his
suit. Knightley and Miss Woodhouse. She must understand you.”

“I hope she does. If he would act in
this sort of manner, on principle, consistently, regularly, their
little minds would bend to his.”

“I rather doubt that. Bennet, with great politeness and
cordiality, said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again,
whenever his other engagements might allow him to visit them. CHAPTER XVII. Fifty thousand pounds! Weston
has done very well for himself; but he must have knocked up every body
else. Edward said very
little; but what he did say, was in the most determined manner. Elton were most desirable or most natural. “If a woman can ever be excused
for thinking only of herself, it is in a situation like Jane
Fairfax’s.—Of such, one may almost say, that ‘the world is not their’s,
nor the world’s law.’”

She met Mr. Elinor,” said John, “your reasoning is very good, but it is
founded on ignorance of human nature. Bingley and his sisters.”

Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s height, or
rather taller.”

“How I long to see her again! Not to appear to disgrace his family, to
degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the
Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. I was startled, I confess, by the alteration in his
manners this morning;—he did not speak like himself, and did not return
your kindness with any cordiality. I
have no such scruples, and I am sure I could put up with every
unpleasantness of that kind with very little effort.”

Elinor could not help smiling at this display of indifference towards
the manners of a person, to whom she had often had difficulty in
persuading Marianne to behave with tolerable politeness; and resolved
within herself, that if her sister persisted in going, she would go
likewise, as she did not think it proper that Marianne should be left
to the sole guidance of her own judgment, or that Mrs. Both sisters were uncomfortable
enough. How that visit was to be acknowledged—what would be necessary—and what
might be safest, had been a point of some doubtful consideration. Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her
questions, but answered them very composedly. “Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here? Woodhouse trembled as
he sat, and, as Emma had foreseen, would scarcely be satisfied without
their promising never to go beyond the shrubbery again. It is
only by seeing women in their own homes, among their own set, just as
they always are, that you can form any just judgment. My fingers wait your orders.”

“Perhaps,” said Darcy, “I should have judged better had I sought an
introduction, but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers.”

“Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?” said Elizabeth, still
addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. Willoughby certainly does not deserve to be
suspected. Yet, how just a humiliation! Darcy, will readily
comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume
even the _appearance_ of what is right. Emma could not have a
better companion than Harriet.”

“I am most happy to hear it—but only Jane Fairfax one knows to be so
very accomplished and superior!—and exactly Emma’s age.”

This topic was discussed very happily, and others succeeded of similar
moment, and passed away with similar harmony; but the evening did not
close without a little return of agitation. As this was a favourite meal with Mrs. He said, from the first, it was a very good
sort—which was our great comfort; but the measles are a dreadful
complaint. When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth
for the indulgence of some music. Mrs. With assumed tranquillity he then replied, “I have no wish of denying
that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your
sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Harriet turned away; but Emma could
receive him with the usual smile, and her quick eye soon discerned in
his the consciousness of having made a push—of having thrown a die; and
she imagined he was come to see how it might turn up. In the whole of her subsequent
manner, she traced the direction of a mind awakened to reasonable
exertion; for no sooner had they entered their common sitting-room,
than Marianne turned her eyes around it with a look of resolute
firmness, as if determined at once to accustom herself to the sight of
every object with which the remembrance of Willoughby could be
connected.—She said little, but every sentence aimed at cheerfulness,
and though a sigh sometimes escaped her, it never passed away without
the atonement of a smile. Weston and Emma, to
be made happy;—from them he would have proceeded to Miss Fairfax, but
she was so deep in conversation with John Knightley, that it would have
been too positive an interruption; and finding himself close to Mrs. By supposing such an
affection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most
unhappy. Here is the rivet
of your mistress’s spectacles out. I will send you some more, before they get good for nothing.’ So
I begged he would not—for really as to ours being gone, I could not
absolutely say that we had a great many left—it was but half a dozen
indeed; but they should be all kept for Jane; and I could not at all
bear that he should be sending us more, so liberal as he had been
already; and Jane said the same. Jane Fairfax was very elegant, remarkably elegant; and she had herself
the highest value for elegance. But when the second moment had
passed, when she found every doubt, every solicitude removed, compared
her situation with what so lately it had been,—saw him honourably
released from his former engagement,—saw him instantly profiting by the
release, to address herself and declare an affection as tender, as
constant as she had ever supposed it to be,—she was oppressed, she was
overcome by her own felicity; and happily disposed as is the human mind
to be easily familiarized with any change for the better, it required
several hours to give sedateness to her spirits, or any degree of
tranquillity to her heart. Mrs. When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the season, a very
awful pause took place. I should as soon call her mother a wit.’ But afterwards she
seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at
one time.”

“Yes,” replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, “but _that_
was only when I first knew her; for it is many months since I have
considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.”

He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of
having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself. Mrs. Bingley; and the
train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to made
her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. I know you will contrive it all.”

But Mr. “Remember, Elinor,” said she, “how very often Sir John fetches our
letters himself from the post, and carries them to it. From Harriet’s happening not to be at Hartfield,
and her father’s being present to engage Mr. How improperly had she been acting by Harriet! We neither of us perform to strangers.”

Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know
what they were talking of. At Christmas every body
invites their friends about them, and people think little of even the
worst weather. as to that, when a man has
once made up his mind to such a thing, somehow or other he will soon
find an opportunity. Bennet’s
means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband. Palmer came running in at the other, looking as
good humoured and merry as before. I am extremely
     glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at
     Hunsford. “It is not fair,” said Emma, in a whisper; “mine was a random guess. It confesses that you have long understood me.”

“No, sir,” cried Emma, “it confesses no such thing. John Knightley.—“It is so
long since I have seen her, except now and then for a moment
accidentally in town! to
look on, while repeated attentions were offering to another woman,
before her face, and not resent it.—That is a degree of placidity,
which I can neither comprehend nor respect.”

“There were misunderstandings between them, Emma; he said so expressly. Ah! Elton, I do not know who will ask her next, perhaps Mr. And poor
John’s son came to talk to Mr. Goddard had dressed it on a Sunday, and asked all the three
teachers, Miss Nash, and Miss Prince, and Miss Richardson, to sup with
her.”

“Mr. On Mr. I
can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor
sister. She would be such a
delightful companion for Emma.”

Mr. “I am very glad, indeed, my dear, to hear she is to be so comfortably
settled. I
question whether Marianne _now_, will marry a man worth more than five
or six hundred a-year, at the utmost, and I am very much deceived if
_you_ do not do better. From this
moment her mind was never quiet; the expectation of seeing him every
hour of the day, made her unfit for any thing. “She
looks sickly and cross. Elton was all
obligation and cheerfulness; he was so very cheerful in his civilities
indeed, that she began to think he must have received a different
account of Harriet from what had reached her. Bennet’s return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking
together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper
coming towards them, and concluding that she came to call them to their
mother, went forward to meet her; but instead of the expected summons,
when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, “I beg your pardon,
madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have got some
good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask.”

“What do you mean, Hill? You are not just to Harriet’s claims. She could easily conceive that marriage might not be immediately in
their power; for though Willoughby was independent, there was no reason
to believe him rich. Her father was growing nervous, and could not understand
_her_. How well she looked last night!”

“Oh! No, indeed, Miss Woodhouse, you need not be afraid; I can sit
and admire him now without any great misery. In this state of suspense they were befriended, not by any sudden
illumination of Mr. 28th—and began, ‘My dear Madam,’ but I forget how it went on; and it
was signed ‘F. Yours, etc. They were to
meet Mrs. We are both prejudiced; you against, I for him; and we have no
chance of agreeing till he is really here.”

“Prejudiced! Very
odd! It
was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own
wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved
him, as now, when all love must be vain. Elton detained him, to gratify him by her opinion
of his son; and so briskly did she begin, that the young man himself,
though by no means moving slowly, could hardly be out of hearing. John Dashwood was really far
from being sorry to see his sisters again; it rather gave them
satisfaction; and his inquiries after their mother were respectful and
attentive. you thought nobody could dance because a certain person that shall be
nameless is gone!”

“I wish with all my soul,” cried Sir John, “that Willoughby were among
us again.”

This, and Marianne’s blushing, gave new suspicions to Edward. Margaret’s sagacity was not always displayed in a way so satisfactory
to her sister. He continued,

“Depend upon it, Elton will not do. The secrecy with which everything had been
carried on between them, was rationally treated as enormously
heightening the crime, because, had any suspicion of it occurred to the
others, proper measures would have been taken to prevent the marriage;
and he called on Elinor to join with him in regretting that Lucy’s
engagement with Edward had not rather been fulfilled, than that she
should thus be the means of spreading misery farther in the family. Dixon?”

“Mrs. You deserve no such attention. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven
o’clock. Elton seemed very properly struck and delighted by the idea, and
was repeating, “No husbands and wives in the case at present indeed, as
you observe. Mrs. I only stood at the door, and
heard what I could. And at any rate, she lost
nothing by continuing the engagement, for she has proved that it
fettered neither her inclination nor her actions. Smith’s grounds, or in seeing her house. Goddard being able to come; and her last pleasing duty, before she left
the house, was to pay her respects to them as they sat together after
dinner; and while her father was fondly noticing the beauty of her
dress, to make the two ladies all the amends in her power, by helping
them to large slices of cake and full glasses of wine, for whatever
unwilling self-denial his care of their constitution might have obliged
them to practise during the meal.—She had provided a plentiful dinner
for them; she wished she could know that they had been allowed to eat
it. Yes, Miss
Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or
friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. If she had only made me a formal courtesy, for
instance, without saying a word, and never after had took any notice of
me, and never looked at me in a pleasant way—you know what I mean—if I
had been treated in that forbidding sort of way, I should have gave it
all up in despair. His brother-in-law, Mr. She was not thoroughly
comfortable herself. I thought you had lost half
your property, at least. She was obliged to go the next morning for an hour or
two to Mrs. You may see the end of the house. Do not you know she calls every one reserved
who does not talk as fast, and admire what she admires as rapturously
as herself?”

Edward made no answer. High hills rose immediately
behind, and at no great distance on each side; some of which were open
downs, the others cultivated and woody. When tea was over Mr. I am delighted to find that you can
vouchsafe to let your imagination wander—but it will not do—very sorry
to check you in your first essay—but indeed it will not do. Your sister is certainly better,
certainly out of danger?”

“We are assured of it.”

“Your poor mother, too!—doting on Marianne.”

“But the letter, Mr. I saw she had execution, but I did not know she had any
taste. Where is
it? Bingley will be very
glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my
hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls--though
I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.”

“I desire you will do no such thing. very delightful indeed; I can say nothing less, for I suppose Miss
Woodhouse and Mr. What was to be done? She had an excellent heart;—her disposition was
affectionate, and her feelings were strong; but she knew how to govern
them: it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn; and which
one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught. To have his errors made public might ruin him for
ever. Brown’s—smiles and blushes rising in importance—with
consciousness and agitation richly scattered—the lady had been so
easily impressed—so sweetly disposed—had in short, to use a most
intelligible phrase, been so very ready to have him, that vanity and
prudence were equally contented. “The post-office is a wonderful establishment!” said she.—“The
regularity and despatch of it! But this was not judged feasible. Darcy, was one of the best men
that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be
in company with this Mr. She had never been quite well since
the time of their daughter’s marriage; and till she should have
completely recovered her usual strength, they must forbid her engaging
in duties, which, so far from being compatible with a weakened frame
and varying spirits, seemed, under the most favourable circumstances,
to require something more than human perfection of body and mind to be
discharged with tolerable comfort. “I assure you there is quite as much of _that_
going on in the country as in town.”

Everybody was surprised; and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,
turned silently away. Dashwood or her daughters imagined when they first came
into Devonshire, that so many engagements would arise to occupy their
time as shortly presented themselves, or that they should have such
frequent invitations and such constant visitors as to leave them little
leisure for serious employment. It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of
Miss Bennet’s mind gave such a glow of sweet animation to her face, as
made her look handsomer than ever. I shall like it of all things. I never saw
any thing so outrée!—Those curls!—This must be a fancy of her own. We admired it so much, that I have
ventured to write it into Miss Smith’s collection. Elizabeth was watchful enough to
see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain. Where there is fortune to make the expense of
travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. Some time hence it will be all found
out, and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. Here are officers enough at
Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she will
never play really well, unless she practises more; and though Mrs. But in spite of all this
     fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that
     your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him credit
     for _another interest_ in the affair. Their attention and wit were drawn off
to his more fortunate rival; and the raillery which the other had
incurred before any partiality arose, was removed when his feelings
began really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility. Elton looked all alarm on the occasion, as
he exclaimed,

“A sore-throat!—I hope not infectious. Edward, it is so, and I will say it. Ferrars will
visit now;—and Mrs. Elton, she had a quarter
of an hour of the lady’s conversation to herself, and could composedly
attend to her; and the quarter of an hour quite convinced her that Mrs. When this was
done, she had a less active part to play. It is such
enjoyment to them, that if their uncle did not lay down the rule of
their taking turns, whichever began would never give way to the other.”

“Well, I cannot understand it.”

“That is the case with us all, papa. Emma’s first resolution was to keep her father from the knowledge of
what had passed,—aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion: but
she soon felt that concealment must be impossible. She felt the
loss of Willoughby’s character yet more heavily than she had felt the
loss of his heart; his seduction and desertion of Miss Williams, the
misery of that poor girl, and the doubt of what his designs might
_once_ have been on herself, preyed altogether so much on her spirits,
that she could not bring herself to speak of what she felt even to
Elinor; and, brooding over her sorrows in silence, gave more pain to
her sister than could have been communicated by the most open and most
frequent confession of them. _I_ shall not be able to keep
you--and so I warn you. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family
prejudice, to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her
master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his
many merits, as they proceeded together up the great staircase. She would be in nobody’s way, you know, in that part
of the house.”

Mr. Elton was wild to have the offer closed with
immediately.—On her side, all was warmth, energy, and triumph—and she
positively refused to take her friend’s negative, though Miss Fairfax
continued to assure her that she would not at present engage in any
thing, repeating the same motives which she had been heard to urge
before.—Still Mrs. Robert’s offence was unpardonable, but Lucy’s was infinitely
worse. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely
to be described. She
could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper,
wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what
Lydia had dropped, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been
intended. No, my dear little modest
Harriet, depend upon it the picture will not be in Bond-street till
just before he mounts his horse to-morrow. For
what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them
in our turn?”

“Oh,” cried Elizabeth, “I am exceedingly diverted. Supported by the conviction of having
done nothing to merit her present unhappiness, and consoled by the
belief that Edward had done nothing to forfeit her esteem, she thought
she could even now, under the first smart of the heavy blow, command
herself enough to guard every suspicion of the truth from her mother
and sisters. Elton; and Harriet’s mind, she had been willing to hope, had been
lately gaining strength. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.”

“That is to say, you had given your permission. But before they heard again from Mr. It was a style of beauty,
of which elegance was the reigning character, and as such, she must, in
honour, by all her principles, admire it:—elegance, which, whether of
person or of mind, she saw so little in Highbury. If all took place that might
take place among the circle of her friends, Hartfield must be
comparatively deserted; and she left to cheer her father with the
spirits only of ruined happiness. Mr. So I
said, I was very much obliged to him: you know I could not do less; and
then he went back to Elizabeth, and I came round by the stables—I
believe I did—but I hardly knew where I was, or any thing about it. Collins,
seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go, and as much
as possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted
so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
before anybody else. Sixteen
miles—nay, eighteen—it must be full eighteen to Manchester-street—was a
serious obstacle. You were
not by, when I told mamma, and the others, all about it. He came to the part of the room
where the sitters-by were collected, spoke to some, and walked about in
front of them, as if to shew his liberty, and his resolution of
maintaining it. In his marrying such a woman
therefore there would be nothing unsuitable. We were
married, you know, at St. “I confess,” said he, “that I should not have been at all surprised by
her Ladyship’s asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening
at Rosings. He felt the disappointment of the young man, and was
mortified to have been the means of promoting it, by the sanction he
had given; and the part which he was persuaded Emma had taken in the
affair, was provoking him exceedingly. It is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I
     hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure. The
possibility of his having really endured such unkindness was enough to
interest all her tender feelings; and nothing therefore remained to be
done but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and
throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be
otherwise explained. I know it has. I will have no reserves from _you_. She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs. Perhaps he had been civil only because he
felt himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in his voice, which was
not like ease. It was a subject, in short, on
which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. Bennet treated the matter differently. “By the bye,” said Frank Churchill to Mrs. Woodhouse and Emma, till Mr. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman’s daughter; so far we are
equal.”

“True. She was immediately up, and wanting to quit the table;
but so many were also moving, that she could not get away; and Mr. She answered with equal
indifference and brevity, and the other said no more. You need not send them word at
     Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the
     surprise the greater when I write to them, and sign my name Lydia
     Wickham. What are
Harriet Smith’s claims, either of birth, nature or education, to any
connexion higher than Robert Martin? could not have supposed any thing!—Such
elegance and profusion!—I have seen nothing like it since—Well, where
shall we sit? Jennings
continued her story as she walked through the passage into the parlour,
attended by Sir John. “His
father’s marriage,” he said, “had been the wisest measure, every friend
must rejoice in it; and the family from whom he had received such a
blessing must be ever considered as having conferred the highest
obligation on him.”

He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss Taylor’s merits,
without seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things it
was to be rather supposed that Miss Taylor had formed Miss Woodhouse’s
character, than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor’s. You know not what you are
about.”

Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply;
and, at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. It must, if I were not here. My mother
says the orchard was always famous in her younger days. Is not general incivility the very essence of love?”

“Oh, yes! Every body seemed injured by me. No wonder! Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about it all! and
Mrs. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?”

Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
without anger such treatment: but Sir William’s good-breeding carried
him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the
truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the
most forbearing courtesy. Ferrars’
power to distress her by it now; and the difference of her manners to
the Miss Steeles, a difference which seemed purposely made to humble
her more, only amused her. so
considerate!—But however, she is so far from well, that her kind
friends the Campbells think she had better come home, and try an air
that always agrees with her; and they have no doubt that three or four
months at Highbury will entirely cure her—and it is certainly a great
deal better that she should come here, than go to Ireland, if she is
unwell. Colonel,” said she, with her usual
noisy cheerfulness, “I am monstrous glad to see you—sorry I could not
come before—beg your pardon, but I have been forced to look about me a
little, and settle my matters; for it is a long while since I have been
at home, and you know one has always a world of little odd things to do
after one has been away for any time; and then I have had Cartwright to
settle with. How does
Charlotte do? Mr. It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early
as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. Elton’s consequence only could surpass. Hurst sang with her sister; and while they were thus employed,
Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books
that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Sir, you are most kind. Elton, as her brother and
sister had failed her, that the two parties should unite, and go
together; and that as Mrs. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia. Dashwood, who had already a cold, was
persuaded by Elinor to stay at home. Mr. He is not at all liked in
Hertfordshire. But, in return, your sister
must allow me to feel no more than I profess. For half an hour Mr. Knightley, rather displeased; “I do not
want to think ill of him. a word to the
wise.—I am in a fine flow of spirits, an’t I? Weston. Even now her self-command is
invariable. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of
his mind was visible in every feature. Darcy. Knightley to mean _you_. But he found, in reply to this question,
     that Wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making
     his fortune by marriage, in some other country. Her joy was of a different kind, and led
to any thing rather than to gaiety. is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?” she cried. Woodhouse, as well as Emma, to join the party;
and he knew that to have any of them sitting down out of doors to eat
would inevitably make him ill. She rather suspected it to be so, on the very first evening
of their being together, from his listening so attentively while she
sang to them; and when the visit was returned by the Middletons’ dining
at the cottage, the fact was ascertained by his listening to her again. He was tired, I dare say, for he had just
filled the sheet to me as full as possible.”

Elinor saw that it _was_ his hand, and she could doubt no longer. Knightley, what a _sensation_ his
coming will produce? She had only to say in
reply, that they had wandered about till she was beyond her own
knowledge. Oh, Lizzy! Elton, in person, had driven away all such cares. He seems a most gentlemanlike man; and I think,
Elinor, I may congratulate you on the prospect of a very respectable
establishment in life.”

“Me, brother! To be sure, the charade, with its “ready
wit”—but then the “soft eyes”—in fact it suited neither; it was a
jumble without taste or truth. He could not understand it; but there were symptoms of
intelligence between them—he thought so at least—symptoms of admiration
on his side, which, having once observed, he could not persuade himself
to think entirely void of meaning, however he might wish to escape any
of Emma’s errors of imagination. Living constantly with right-minded and well-informed
people, her heart and understanding had received every advantage of
discipline and culture; and Colonel Campbell’s residence being in
London, every lighter talent had been done full justice to, by the
attendance of first-rate masters. The composure of mind with which I have brought
myself at present to consider the matter, the consolation that I have
been willing to admit, have been the effect of constant and painful
exertion; they did not spring up of themselves; they did not occur to
relieve my spirits at first. Willoughby filled every
page. Hazle eyes excepted, two years more might make her all that he wished. In a moment I shall see the person that all my happiness
depends on—that is to be my mother!”

Elinor could have given her immediate relief by suggesting the
possibility of its being Miss Morton’s mother, rather than her own,
whom they were about to behold; but instead of doing that, she assured
her, and with great sincerity, that she did pity her—to the utter
amazement of Lucy, who, though really uncomfortable herself, hoped at
least to be an object of irrepressible envy to Elinor. if you knew!—And can you believe
me to be so, while I see you so wretched!”

“Forgive me, forgive me,” throwing her arms round her sister’s neck; “I
know you feel for me; I know what a heart you have; but yet you are—you
must be happy; Edward loves you—what, oh what, can do away such
happiness as that?”

“Many, many circumstances,” said Elinor, solemnly. She returned it almost
instantly, acknowledging the likeness. But you may be assured that I would not
sacrifice one sentiment of local attachment of yours, or of any one
whom I loved, for all the improvements in the world. She would sit whenever I asked her. Jennings and her
daughter; and her confidence was rewarded by finding even the former,
even the woman with whom her sisters were staying, by no means unworthy
her notice; and as for Lady Middleton, she found her one of the most
charming women in the world! He had never had
the slightest suspicion. Believe them to be stronger than I have declared; believe
them, in short, to be such as his merit, and the suspicion—the hope of
his affection for me may warrant, without imprudence or folly. Now will be the time. Knightley thought highly of
them—but they must be coarse and unpolished, and very unfit to be the
intimates of a girl who wanted only a little more knowledge and
elegance to be quite perfect. Jennings, without attending to her daughter’s reproof. He had returned to a late
dinner, and walked to Hartfield as soon as it was over. If any thing could be more, where all was most, she was more reserved
on the subject of Weymouth and the Dixons than any thing. Ferrars!”

The deception could not continue after this; and an explanation
immediately took place, by which both gained considerable amusement for
the moment, without any material loss of happiness to either, for Mrs. His medicines
had failed;—the fever was unabated; and Marianne only more quiet—not
more herself—remained in a heavy stupor. Weston. Why was it so much worse that Harriet
should be in love with Mr. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have
supposed about Mr. at least, that I should ever bore people
half so much about all the Knightleys together, as she does about Jane
Fairfax. In such a party, Harriet would be rather a dead
weight than otherwise; but for the poor girl herself, it seemed a
peculiarly cruel necessity that was to be placing her in such a state
of unmerited punishment. Knightley, whom no weather could keep
entirely from them,—

“Ah! I only want to know
that Mr. Knightley,
laughing, “and I agree with you entirely, that it will be a much better
thing. And so then, in my nonsense, I could not help
making a treasure of it—so I put it by never to be used, and looked at
it now and then as a great treat.”

“My dearest Harriet!” cried Emma, putting her hand before her face, and
jumping up, “you make me more ashamed of myself than I can bear. Elinor,” she cried, “you have made me hate myself for ever.—How
barbarous have I been to you!—you, who have been my only comfort, who
have borne with me in all my misery, who have seemed to be only
suffering for me!—Is this my gratitude?—Is this the only return I can
make you?—Because your merit cries out upon myself, I have been trying
to do it away.”

The tenderest caresses followed this confession. Elizabeth, though expecting no
less, thanked him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated
by one spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily
settled. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am sure I
never want to see him again. who attended to you? Knightley!—Mr. When the gloves were bought, and they had quitted the shop again, “Did
you ever hear the young lady we were speaking of, play?” said Frank
Churchill. Darcy is all politeness,” said Elizabeth, smiling. But when she read and re-read, with the closest attention, the
particulars immediately following of Wickham’s resigning all pretensions
to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three
thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. Nothing so easy as for a young lady to raise her expectations
too high. “Can anything be more galling to the spirit of a man,” continued John,
“than to see his younger brother in possession of an estate which might
have been his own? He had expressed himself as to
coming, with more than common certainty. Harriet did not consider herself as having
any thing to complain of. The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth
much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing
but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Jennings, that could command the
indifference of any body else?”

“But perhaps the abuse of such people as yourself and Marianne will
make amends for the regard of Lady Middleton and her mother. I mean in person—tall, and with that sort of look—and
not very talkative.”

“Quite wrong, my dear aunt; there is no likeness at all.”

“Very odd! Dashwood, with a good humoured smile,
“that Mr. What had Edward
felt on being within four miles from Barton, on seeing her mother’s
servant, on hearing Lucy’s message! Knightley; he declined it from the first; and though I
thought he would come, because Mrs. At present, I know him so well, that I think him really
handsome; or at least, almost so. But perhaps you have
been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person, in which case
you may be sure of my pardon.”

“No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing
satisfactory to tell you. Weston
indeed is much beyond praise, and he is exactly what one values, so
hospitable, and so fond of society;—it will be a small party, but where
small parties are select, they are perhaps the most agreeable of any. Elton had just joined them, and his wife was exclaiming,

“Oh! To know that her daughter
would be married was enough. And it is no small credit, in my opinion, to him,
that he should excite such an affection; for, though I would not say it
to any body else, she has no more heart than a stone to people in
general; and the devil of a temper.”

Emma liked the subject so well, that she began upon it, to Mrs. She
was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away
with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in
speaking to Mr. She is almost three-and-twenty! She was very wrong in singling me out as
     she did; I can safely say, that every advance to intimacy began on
     her side. With some there was great joy at the sight of Frank Churchill; others
took it very composedly; but there was a very general distress and
disturbance on Miss Fairfax’s disappearance being explained. I will not tell you what it is. Has Emma read
it all? You are so kind!” replied the happily deceived aunt, while
eagerly hunting for the letter.—“Oh! Receive it on my judgment. This was so very well understood between them, that Emma could not but
feel some surprise, and a little displeasure, on hearing from Mr. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction
of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have
always so much.”

Mr. The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her,
and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he
told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter. Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly, with the
readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but
his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and
garden to Mrs. CHAPTER XLVIII. [Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI. They seem not able to do any thing without
him.—‘Upon my word, Mr. How shall we punish him for such a speech?”

“Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination,” said Elizabeth. and Mrs. Let us make the
best of it—and, indeed, almost every thing may be fairly said in her
favour. “So obliged to you!—so very much obliged to you for the carriage,”
resumed Miss Bates. And, after all, what is it you suspect
him of?”

“I can hardly tell myself. Must go and speak to Dr. But of course she did not mention my name to you.”

“Yes, she did.”

“And what did she say?”

“That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had--not turned
out well. Mrs. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. As for Willoughby—to say that I
shall soon or that I shall ever forget him, would be idle. Martin’s saying as she was so fond of it, it
should be called _her_ cow; and of their having a very handsome
summer-house in their garden, where some day next year they were all to
drink tea:—a very handsome summer-house, large enough to hold a dozen
people.”

For some time she was amused, without thinking beyond the immediate
cause; but as she came to understand the family better, other feelings
arose. Weston’s letters lately have
been full of very little else than Mrs. Had he said any thing to bear a different
construction, I should not have believed him.”

“My Emma, he means no such thing. Darcy. It was not to be supposed that any other
people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. Frank comes to-morrow—I had a letter this
morning—we see him to-morrow by dinner-time to a certainty—he is at
Oxford to-day, and he comes for a whole fortnight; I knew it would be
so. In another minute Mr. His coming to visit
his father had been often talked of but never achieved. High in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicities, was the
reflection that all necessity of concealment from Mr. Their parties
abroad were less varied than before; and at home she had a mother and
sister, whose constant repinings at the dulness of everything around
them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty
might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers
of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition
greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her
folly and assurance, by a situation of such double danger as a
watering-place and a camp. but he hoped he should in time.”
And it always ended in “Kitty, a fair but frozen maid.”

His good friend Perry, too, whom he had spoken to on the subject, did
not at present recollect any thing of the riddle kind; but he had
desired Perry to be upon the watch, and as he went about so much,
something, he thought, might come from that quarter. Could she exert herself, it would be
better, but this is not to be expected; and as to my father, I never in
my life saw him so affected. Collins could be
forgotten, there was really a great air of comfort throughout, and by
Charlotte’s evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be often
forgotten. But he is an ugly fellow! Jennings, before her company was
claimed by Mrs. Do not let any reflection fall on
the principles or the care of the friends who brought me up. She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that Highbury, taken at
its best, might reasonably please a young man who had more retirement
at home than he liked. “In short,” said he, “perhaps, Miss Woodhouse—I think you can hardly be
quite without suspicion”—

He looked at her, as if wanting to read her thoughts. You would not think it perhaps, but Marianne _was_
remarkably handsome a few months ago; quite as handsome as Elinor. Elinor even advised her against it. Edward
Ferrars!—I confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me,
that really—I beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistake of
person or name. Emma shall be an angel, and
I will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John and
Isabella. Knightley,
first in interest and affection.—Satisfied that it was so, and feeling
it her due, she had enjoyed it without reflection; and only in the
dread of being supplanted, found how inexpressibly important it had
been.—Long, very long, she felt she had been first; for, having no
female connexions of his own, there had been only Isabella whose claims
could be compared with hers, and she had always known exactly how far
he loved and esteemed Isabella. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving
anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is, that she is deceived
herself.”

“That is right. “Louisa, you will not mind my
waking Mr. You must not confound my meaning. “Part of my lace is gone,” said she, “and I do not know how I am to
contrive. “Then you
would not have me tell it to Lucy, for I think of going as far as
Holborn to-day.”

“No, ma’am, not even Lucy if you please. And as for Harriet, I will venture to say that _she_
cannot gain by the acquaintance. “M.D.”


The contents of her last note to him were these:—

“What am I to imagine, Willoughby, by your behaviour last night? But I cannot
talk.”

Elinor said no more, and turning again to the three letters which now
raised a much stronger curiosity than before, directly ran over the
contents of all. Better pass it off as a joke. A continuance in a place where everything reminded her of former
delight, was exactly what suited her mind. Tell your aunt, little
Emma, that she ought to set you a better example than to be renewing
old grievances, and that if she were not wrong before, she is now.”

“That’s true,” she cried—“very true. “We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the Vicarage, my
dear Emma—but it is better than being always at home. “I have the greatest pleasure, my dear Emma, in forwarding to you the
enclosed. Mrs. Am I reserved, Marianne?”

“Yes, very.”

“I do not understand you,” replied he, colouring. Harriet was
remembered only from being _her_ friend. Mrs. He has told me so himself.”

Her daughter, feeling by turns both pleased and pained, surprised and
not surprised, was all silent attention. “Why do you smile?” said she. Those three or four weeks were worse than all. “But to expose the former faults of any person, without knowing what
their present feelings were, seemed unjustifiable.”

“We acted with the best intentions.”

“Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia’s note to his
wife?”

“He brought it with him for us to see.”

Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. Collins allowed him to speak,
replied with an air of distant civility. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of
their father and mother. She was shown into the breakfast parlour, where all but Jane were
assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise. It
would be incompatible with what she owed to her father, and with what
she felt for him. Well, that is so very!—I am sure if Jane is tired, you will
be so kind as to give her your arm.—Mr. The
business was therefore soon settled. His demands and your
inexperience together, on a small, very small income, must have brought
on distresses which would not be the _less_ grievous to you, from
having been entirely unknown and unthought of before. He had
no pleasure at Norland; he detested being in town; but either to
Norland or London, he must go. Dashwood. Weston’s
confidence, she could not think it so very impossible that the
Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his
fortnight. “Come here, child,” cried her father as she appeared. In society so superior to what she had generally
known, her improvement was great. But she probably
had something of that in her thoughts, when alluding to the
misunderstandings which he had given us hints of before. Bingley has not much idea of ever
returning to Netherfield again?”

“I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend
very little of his time there in future. Dashwood’s romantic
delicacy. I am in a fine mood for gaiety. Harriet
Smith marries Robert Martin.”

Emma gave a start, which did not seem like being prepared—and her eyes,
in eager gaze, said, “No, this is impossible!” but her lips were
closed. “I shall
never be easy till I have seen some of these places. Mrs. no, no, Henry must have Donwell. John Knightley. For
four months, Marianne, I have had all this hanging on my mind, without
being at liberty to speak of it to a single creature; knowing that it
would make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explained to
you, yet unable to prepare you for it in the least. Cole
should have done it. Jane has
heard a great deal of its beauty; from Mr. The eldest
of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was
Elizabeth’s intimate friend. But instead of having any thing to do, instead of
having any profession chosen for me, or being allowed to chuse any
myself, I returned home to be completely idle; and for the first
twelvemonth afterwards I had not even the nominal employment, which
belonging to the university would have given me; for I was not entered
at Oxford till I was nineteen. If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the
younger Miss Bennets would have been in a pitiable state at this time;
for, from the day of the invitation to the day of the ball, there was
such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton once. Knightley’s downright, decided, commanding
sort of manner, though it suits _him_ very well; his figure, and look,
and situation in life seem to allow it; but if any young man were to
set about copying him, he would not be sufferable. Elton chose another
subject. But your sister does
not—I think you said so—she does not consider quite as you do?”

“You know her disposition, and may believe how eagerly she would still
justify him if she could.”

He made no answer; and soon afterwards, by the removal of the
tea-things, and the arrangement of the card parties, the subject was
necessarily dropped. My poor father! Bates as well as Mrs. And as for
objects of interest, objects for the affections, which is in truth the
great point of inferiority, the want of which is really the great evil
to be avoided in _not_ marrying, I shall be very well off, with all the
children of a sister I love so much, to care about. Colonel
Fitzwilliam’s occasionally laughing at his stupidity proved that he was
generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told
her; and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of
love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself
seriously to work to find it out: she watched him whenever they were at
Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. I shall tell Colonel
Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not.”

Mrs. Mama, the more I know of the world, the more am I convinced that I
shall never see a man whom I can really love. She had
depended on a twilight walk to the Grecian temple, and perhaps all over
the grounds, and an evening merely cold or damp would not have deterred
her from it; but a heavy and settled rain even _she_ could not fancy
dry or pleasant weather for walking. But she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently
regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for
compassion. Where features were indifferent, a fine complexion gave beauty to them
all; and where they were good, the effect was—fortunately he need not
attempt to describe what the effect was. He thought much of the evils of the journey for her, and not a little
of the fatigues of his own horses and coachman who were to bring some
of the party the last half of the way; but his alarms were needless;
the sixteen miles being happily accomplished, and Mr. He was confused,
seemed scarcely sensible of pleasure in seeing them, looked neither
rapturous nor gay, said little but what was forced from him by
questions, and distinguished Elinor by no mark of affection. Every year since
my coming of age, or even before, I believe, had added to my debts; and
though the death of my old cousin, Mrs. The happiness of Miss Smith was
quite equal to her intentions. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her Ladyship’s
praise into his own hands. Her spirits still continued very high; but there was a flutter in them
which prevented their giving much pleasure to her sister, and this
agitation increased as the evening drew on. I
think, on the contrary, when people shut themselves up entirely from
society, it is a very bad thing; and that it is much more advisable to
mix in the world in a proper degree, without living in it either too
much or too little. Do you think it incredible
that Mr. He so frequently
talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping, and of the perpetual
demands upon his purse, which a man of any consequence in the world was
beyond calculation exposed to, that he seemed rather to stand in need
of more money himself than to have any design of giving money away. One has not great hopes from Birmingham. Not that I imagine he
can think I have been encouraging him hitherto. “But I thought you would. There is no danger of your
not being intelligible, which is the first thing. Weston shook his head, and looked solemn, and said, “Ah! Mr. “Is not she looking well?” said he, turning his eyes towards Jane. Knightley was to
come at such a time, and follow up the beginning she was to make.—She
was forced to speak, and to speak cheerfully too. Elton! “Certainly, ma’am, I shall tell Marianne of it; but I shall not mention
it at present to any body else.”

“Oh! _My_ happiness never was his object.”

“At present,” continued Elinor, “he regrets what he has done. [Illustration:

“The Apothecary came”
]




[Illustration:

“covering a screen”
]




CHAPTER VIII. Mr. Philips was quite awed by such an excess of good
breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put an end to
by exclamations and inquiries about the other, of whom, however, she
could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that Mr. He told me it was to be a great secret;
and, therefore, I should not think of mentioning it to any body but
you, but he said you knew it.”

“What did Mr. “As for the
house itself, to be sure,” said she, “it is too small for our family,
but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the present, as it
is too late in the year for improvements. If _she_ does not object to it,
why should _we_?”

“_Her_ not objecting does not justify _him_. Gardiner, whose curiosity
as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive. For her own sake she could not be rude; and for
Harriet’s, in the hope that all would yet turn out right, she was even
positively civil; but it was an effort; especially as something was
going on amongst the others, in the most overpowering period of Mr. She went, however; and when they reached the farm, and she was to be
put down, at the end of the broad, neat gravel walk, which led between
espalier apple-trees to the front door, the sight of every thing which
had given her so much pleasure the autumn before, was beginning to
revive a little local agitation; and when they parted, Emma observed
her to be looking around with a sort of fearful curiosity, which
determined her not to allow the visit to exceed the proposed quarter of
an hour. Before any answer could arrive from Mr. has she frightened away
some of your lovers? The weather
does not look well, and grandmama will be uneasy. I only fear that
the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been alluding, is
merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and
judgment he stands much in awe. So afraid you might have a headache!—seeing you pass by so often,
and knowing how much trouble you must have. And I do not think it of light importance
that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards
everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. “I, who have prided myself on
my discernment! Woodhouse declined cards
entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his dear Isabella, and
the little party made two natural divisions; on one side he and his
daughter; on the other the two Mr. But “no, she would go down;
she could bear it very well, and the bustle about her would be less.”
Elinor, pleased to have her governed for a moment by such a motive,
though believing it hardly possible that she could sit out the dinner,
said no more; and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could,
while Marianne still remained on the bed, was ready to assist her into
the dining room as soon as they were summoned to it. You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles, I
am sure, sir; friendly, good sort of people as ever lived, and who have
been your neighbours these _ten_ years.”

“No, upon no account in the world, Mr. Campbell a friendly,
warm-hearted woman. Harriet’s claims to marry well are not so
contemptible as you represent them. They will have nothing else to
do.”

Mr. Bennet was mindful of her
intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at
Longbourn in a few days’ time. But what does he say of the living?”

“He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard
them from Mr. Let me never see either
one or the other again!”

Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no
compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing
how much the beauty of her sister rekindled the admiration of her former
lover. After a short pause,
her companion added, “You are too generous to trifle with me. I know
he did. Could she have chosen with whom to associate, she would not have chosen
her. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love
you.”

Elizabeth’s astonishment was beyond expression. Bennet to her daughters’ room, in her
dressing-gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out,--

“My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. What can it be? “Well, my dear,” she cried, “I sent you up the young man. But--good Lord! Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the
compliment must be all for herself. Woodhouse had reached her with his request to be
allowed to hand her into the dining-parlour, was saying—

“Must I go first? Whatever bears affinity to cunning is
despicable.”

Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to
continue the subject. He can sit down and write a fine
flourishing letter, full of professions and falsehoods, and persuade
himself that he has hit upon the very best method in the world of
preserving peace at home and preventing his father’s having any right
to complain. “I dare say you will find him very agreeable.”

“Heaven forbid! You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. That infamous letter? Everything
     being settled between _them_, Mr. But do not be cast down. Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed,
especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of
her courtesy and address of his friend. Elton; but when she considered
that Mr. From Monday next to Saturday, I assure you we have not a
disengaged day!—A woman with fewer resources than I have, need not have
been at a loss.”

No invitation came amiss to her. Mr. Woodhouse), Your father’s state of
health must be a great drawback. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he
had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended
him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in
being with him, as well as by his evident admiration, of her former
favourite, George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw there
was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners, she
believed he might have the best informed mind. Weston’s having
mentioned it in one of her letters to Enscombe, many weeks ago, with
all these particulars—but as she declares she never heard a syllable of
it before, of course it must have been a dream. Weston. to be sure,” cried Emma, “it is always incomprehensible to a man
that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage. The
dread of being awakened from the happiest dream, was perhaps the most
prominent feeling. Darcy said
nothing at all. Elton elsewhere; but she was in a humour to have patience with every
body; and as Mrs. She felt all the honest pride and complacency which her alliance with
the present and future proprietor could fairly warrant, as she viewed
the respectable size and style of the building, its suitable, becoming,
characteristic situation, low and sheltered—its ample gardens
stretching down to meadows washed by a stream, of which the Abbey, with
all the old neglect of prospect, had scarcely a sight—and its abundance
of timber in rows and avenues, which neither fashion nor extravagance
had rooted up.—The house was larger than Hartfield, and totally unlike
it, covering a good deal of ground, rambling and irregular, with many
comfortable, and one or two handsome rooms.—It was just what it ought
to be, and it looked what it was—and Emma felt an increasing respect
for it, as the residence of a family of such true gentility, untainted
in blood and understanding.—Some faults of temper John Knightley had;
but Isabella had connected herself unexceptionably. She seems quite recovered
now. I have a right to talk on such subjects, without
being suspected of introducing Robert Martin.”—She did not suspect him. The reasons for this alteration were at the same time related,
and they were such as to make further entreaty on his side impossible. Wickedness is always wickedness, but folly is not always folly.—It
depends upon the character of those who handle it. Bennet; and,
as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife. “I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,” said he. Georgiana had the highest opinion
in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an
astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive manner of
talking to her brother. “Take a
little time, consider, do not commit yourself.”

“Thank you,” said he, in an accent of deep mortification, and not
another syllable followed. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to
     say, there will be some little money, even when all his debts are
     discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune. It is settled between us already that we
are to be the happiest couple in the world. to see him in a circle of
strangers! I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. But what could I do!—we were
engaged, every thing in preparation, the day almost fixed—But I am
talking like a fool. If he did
shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight. Mrs. And now do you pity
me, Miss Dashwood? Palmer,
on her baby’s account. Martin and the two girls. She ran away to indulge the inclination, leaving the tender and
the sublime of pleasure to Harriet’s share. Collins, however, was not
discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Pray, how _violent was_
Mr. Collins
was employed in agreeing to everything her Ladyship said, thanking her
for every fish he won, and apologizing if he thought he won too many. “You are very good. Accept my thanks for
the compliment you are paying me. Your friend will not
take it amiss I hope. Elizabeth had heard, soon after her arrival, that Mr. “There has
been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I cannot find
out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think
her a very good sort of girl. The regular and best
families Emma could hardly suppose they would presume to invite—neither
Donwell, nor Hartfield, nor Randalls. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw
Mr. But, my
dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that, because Miss Bingley
tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest
degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he took leave of you on
Tuesday; or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, instead
of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.”

“If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,” replied Jane, “your
representation of all this might make me quite easy. No, no; she has qualities which may be
trusted; she will never lead any one really wrong; she will make no
lasting blunder; where Emma errs once, she is in the right a hundred
times.”

“Very well; I will not plague you any more. His behaviour to myself has been
scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and
everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the
memory of his father.”

Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with
all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry. Perry and learnt his opinion; and
though she tried to laugh it off and bring the subject back into its
proper course, there was no putting an end to his extreme solicitude
about her. There were but few who
could be so classed; and it was not all of them that were attainable. Weston—he was continually here—I always found him
very pleasant—and, in short, for (with a sigh) let me swell out the
causes ever so ingeniously, they all centre in this at last—my vanity
was flattered, and I allowed his attentions. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of
friendship and affection. “She is happy, then,” said her father, drily; “and her residence there
will probably be of some duration.”

Then, after a short silence, he continued, “Lizzy, I bear you no
ill-will for being justified in your advice to me last May, which,
considering the event, shows some greatness of mind.”

They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother’s
tea. Bennet, and was a
great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. These were the ladies whom Emma found herself very frequently able to
collect; and happy was she, for her father’s sake, in the power;
though, as far as she was herself concerned, it was no remedy for the
absence of Mrs. “Mrs. Elton.—This letter tells us—it is a short letter—written in a hurry,
merely to give us notice—it tells us that they are all coming up to
town directly, on Mrs. Woodhouse came into the room; her vanity had then a change of
object, and Emma heard her saying in the same half-whisper to Jane,

“Here comes this dear old beau of mine, I protest!—Only think of his
gallantry in coming away before the other men!—what a dear creature he
is;—I assure you I like him excessively. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. Weston.”

“Why, to own the truth, I am afraid you are rather thrown away, and
that with every disposition to bear, there will be nothing to be borne. Was I more considerate of you and your comfort? Goddard and others, were a
good deal behind-hand in knowledge of the world, but she would soon
shew them how every thing ought to be arranged. and
Mrs. It opens his designs to his family,
it introduces you among them, it diffuses through the party those
pleasantest feelings of our nature, eager curiosity and warm
prepossession. And yet, upon my honour, I
believed what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this
moment. She was short, plump, and fair, with a
fine bloom, blue eyes, light hair, regular features, and a look of
great sweetness, and, before the end of the evening, Emma was as much
pleased with her manners as her person, and quite determined to
continue the acquaintance. Her influence
would have been enough. On their being joined by Mr. John Knightley, from having been longer than usual absent
from Surry, were exciting of course rather more than the usual
interest. Ferrars can have the smallest satisfaction in
knowing that her son has money enough to live upon, for _that_ must be
quite out of the question; yet why, upon her late behaviour, is she
supposed to feel at all? Knightley and Harriet
distinct from the rest, quietly leading the way. He gave her to understand that Frank admired her
extremely—thought her very beautiful and very charming; and with so
much to be said for him altogether, she found she must not judge him
harshly. While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether
she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. The _tête-à-tête_
surprised them. Lord! Miss Woodhouse, do you think we shall ever find it out?”

“Mermaids and sharks! “And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?” said Mr. About four days after Edward’s arrival Colonel Brandon appeared, to
complete Mrs. Ladies can never look ill. Knightley, in fact, was one of the few people who could see faults
in Emma Woodhouse, and the only one who ever told her of them: and
though this was not particularly agreeable to Emma herself, she knew it
would be so much less so to her father, that she would not have him
really suspect such a circumstance as her not being thought perfect by
every body. Ah! “Edward’s love for me,” said Lucy, “has been pretty well put to the
test, by our long, very long absence since we were first engaged, and
it has stood the trial so well, that I should be unpardonable to doubt
it now. The studied indifference, insolence, and discontent of her
husband gave her no pain; and when he scolded or abused her, she was
highly diverted. I would not attempt to force the
confidence of any one; of a child much less; because a sense of duty
would prevent the denial which her wishes might direct.”

Elinor thought this generosity overstrained, considering her sister’s
youth, and urged the matter farther, but in vain; common sense, common
care, common prudence, were all sunk in Mrs. And on my own account too—so dear as he is to me—I don’t
think I could be equal to it. Mr. Its tendency would be to raise and refine her mind—and it must
be saving her from the danger of degradation. Perrys,
and the Mrs. After staying with them half an hour, he asked Elinor to walk with him
to Conduit Street, and introduce him to Sir John and Lady Middleton. Knightley. She saw with maternal complacency all the impertinent
encroachments and mischievous tricks to which her cousins submitted. Mr. She was warmly gratified—and in
another moment still more so, by a little movement of more than common
friendliness on his part.—He took her hand;—whether she had not herself
made the first motion, she could not say—she might, perhaps, have
rather offered it—but he took her hand, pressed it, and certainly was
on the point of carrying it to his lips—when, from some fancy or other,
he suddenly let it go.—Why he should feel such a scruple, why he should
change his mind when it was all but done, she could not perceive.—He
would have judged better, she thought, if he had not stopped.—The
intention, however, was indubitable; and whether it was that his
manners had in general so little gallantry, or however else it
happened, but she thought nothing became him more.—It was with him, of
so simple, yet so dignified a nature.—She could not but recall the
attempt with great satisfaction. Goddard’s
drawing-room; and of her having an upper maid who had lived
five-and-twenty years with her; and of their having eight cows, two of
them Alderneys, and one a little Welch cow, a very pretty little Welch
cow indeed; and of Mrs. In another day
or two perhaps; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer—nay,
perhaps it may freeze tonight!”

“At any rate,” said Elinor, wishing to prevent Mrs. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more
delight. I will speak to her about it myself directly. He must think himself a most
agreeable fellow; I could not do such a thing. Every distinguishing attention that could be paid, was paid to
her. She was always a very affable and free-spoken
young lady, and very civil behaved. Nothing could be pleasanter. But Elinor had no such dependence; for since Edward would still
be unable to marry Miss Morton, and his chusing herself had been spoken
of in Mrs. Mrs. Elinor repeated the particulars of it, as
she had given them to John; and their effect on Robert, though very
different, was not less striking than it had been on _him_. “I must ask whether you were surprised?” said Elizabeth. Oh! he is quite smitten already, and he is very well worth setting
your cap at, I can tell you, in spite of all this tumbling about and
spraining of ankles.”




CHAPTER X. Shall I call
upon them? She deserves a better fate.”

Emma understood him; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter
of pleasure, excited by such tender consideration, replied,

“You are very kind—but you are mistaken—and I must set you right.— I am
not in want of that sort of compassion. Knightley have been
privy to all her attempts of assisting Jane Fairfax, could he even have
seen into her heart, he would not, on this occasion, have found any
thing to reprove. It
was generally evident, whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her; and
to _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference
which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a
way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it
was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane
united with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and an
uniform cheerfulness of manner, which would guard her from the
suspicions of the impertinent. [Illustration]

More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park,
unexpectedly meet Mr. Miss Woodhouse, do
talk to me and make me comfortable again.”

Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not immediately in
her power. Wickham was to the
last so steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it to me to
promote his advancement in the best manner that his profession might
allow, and if he took orders, desired that a valuable family living
might be his as soon as it became vacant. It will be bad enough for the horses.”

Isabella turned to Mrs. The case is, you see, that the Campbells
are going to Ireland. the amiable, obliging, gentle Mr. Weston seems an excellent creature—quite a first-rate favourite
with me already, I assure you. “None; not one. And, seriously, Miss Fairfax is naturally so
pale, as almost always to give the appearance of ill health.—A most
deplorable want of complexion.”

Emma would not agree to this, and began a warm defence of Miss
Fairfax’s complexion. The
letter was from this gentleman himself, and written in the true spirit
of friendly accommodation. John
Dashwood, by this pointed invitation to her brother, how totally she
disregarded her disapprobation of the match. But not so
easily did Elinor recover from the alarm into which it had thrown her. But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for she directly replied,

“Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regard for me, and next to
Edward’s love, it is the greatest comfort I have. Here, Sarah, come to Miss
Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare
say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. I can recall nothing worse. “Yours,” etc. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no
longer an object. Well! no—there is nothing to surprize one at all.—A pretty fortune; and
she came in his way.”

“I dare say,” returned Harriet, sighing again, “I dare say she was very
much attached to him.”

“Perhaps she might; but it is not every man’s fate to marry the woman
who loves him best. Bingley. I certainly
should have represented it to Edward in a very strong light. Dear,
Miss Woodhouse, I was absolutely miserable! I never was
more surprized—but it does not make me unhappy, I assure you.—How—how
has it been possible?”

“It is a very simple story. Her letter was scarcely finished, when a rap foretold a visitor, and
Colonel Brandon was announced. Very far from it, indeed. He is a most amiable, charming young man, I
believe. Neither
Lady Middleton nor Mrs. To her dress and appearance she was grown so perfectly indifferent, as
not to bestow half the consideration on it, during the whole of her
toilet, which it received from Miss Steele in the first five minutes of
their being together, when it was finished. “Only think of its being three months,” she cried, “since I went away:
it seems but a fortnight, I declare; and yet there have been things
enough happened in the time. It was a
gentleman, it was Colonel Brandon himself. Weston, do not mistake me. Knightley, “She certainly is handsome; she
is better than handsome!” Jane had spent an evening at Hartfield with
her grandmother and aunt, and every thing was relapsing much into its
usual state. But let me advise you to think better of it. Every body seemed
happy; and the praise of being a delightful ball, which is seldom
bestowed till after a ball has ceased to be, was repeatedly given in
the very beginning of the existence of this. Why, especially, when you
called, did you look as if you did not care about me?”

“Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.”

“But I was embarrassed.”

“And so was I.”

“You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.”

“A man who had felt less might.”

“How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that
I should be so reasonable as to admit it! Frank Churchill! Being pretty well aware of what
sort of joy you must both be feeling, I have been in no hurry with my
congratulations; but I hope it all went off tolerably well. Well! “You either choose this method of passing
the evening because you are in each other’s confidence, and have secret
affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures
appear to the greatest advantage in walking: if the first, I should be
completely in your way; and if the second, I can admire you much better
as I sit by the fire.”

“Oh, shocking!” cried Miss Bingley. Very
frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and
Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such
hard-heartedness in any of the family. Elinor, while she waited in silence and immovable gravity, the
conclusion of such folly, could not restrain her eyes from being fixed
on him with a look that spoke all the contempt it excited. Not handsome enough to dance with! Bingley, I am sure. Jane, you have never seen Mr. Smallridge’s children—a
dear friend of Mrs. Miss
Fairfax’s recent illness had offered a fair plea for Mrs. Frank Churchill. Her father’s business was to announce James’s being gone out to put the
horses to, preparatory to their now daily drive to Randalls; and she
had, therefore, an immediate excuse for disappearing. The dinner, too, in its turn, was highly admired;
and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellence of its
cookery was owing. “I know little of the game at present,” said he, “but I shall be glad to
improve myself; for in my situation of life----” Mrs. The complaints and lamentations which politeness had hitherto
restrained, now burst forth universally; and they all agreed again and
again how provoking it was to be so disappointed. “Poor little creatures!” said Miss Steele, as soon as they were gone. But to appear happy when I am so
miserable—Oh! The most unaccountable business! Bennet, “and I
dare say she is a very agreeable woman. What
I felt on hearing that your sister was dying, and dying too, believing
me the greatest villain upon earth, scorning, hating me in her latest
moments—for how could I tell what horrid projects might not have been
imputed? It is not a state to be safely entered into with doubtful
feelings, with half a heart. ‘My dear Madam,’ I
always say to her, ‘you must make yourself easy. It is, in short, impossible for us to
conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,
without actual blame on either side.”

“Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say in
behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the
business? It had not been forgotten before, but
it had been soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will
keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an
object of prey to anybody. Her heart was not so much at ease,
nor her satisfaction in their amusements so pure. His manly beauty and more than common gracefulness were instantly the
theme of general admiration, and the laugh which his gallantry raised
against Marianne received particular spirit from his exterior
attractions. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XXIV. That would be enough for us to marry
upon, and we might trust to time and chance for the rest.”

“I should always be happy,” replied Elinor, “to show any mark of my
esteem and friendship for Mr. Darcy looked
up. Mr. He must enter into all my feelings; the same books, the
same music must charm us both. I am not one of those who have
witty things at every body’s service. He protested that, except Lady
Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for
she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but had even
pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although
utterly unknown to her before. Every kind of pride must revolt from
the connection. But the person who advanced was
now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness,
pronounced her name. And to
what part of it?” She explained the situation. He did not know what
was come to his master lately, he said, but he could hardly ever get
the speech of him. They were hopeless of remedy. Now, as her objection was nothing
but her very great dislike of Mrs. In my Bath
life, I have seen such instances of it! Kitty and me were to spend
the day there, and Mrs. or a mermaid? Goddard’s in his way. has she any family?”

“She has one only daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
extensive property.”

“Ah,” cried Mrs. On Mrs. and Mrs. Darcy’s
pleasure, in the Bingleys’ invitation to the officers; and though this
was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was
pronounced by his friend Mr. “You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after
seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting
yesterday. She could tell nothing of Hartfield, in which Mrs. I do not trust my own
partiality. Absence had increased her desire
of seeing Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. I do not recommend matrimony at present to Emma,
though I mean no slight to the state, I assure you.”

Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of her own
and Mr. After a few minutes of entire silence between them, John Knightley
began with—

“I never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than Mr. Can you be?” And she did not feel much
delighted with the idea of such a sister-in-law. But I would
not wish you to take the trouble of making any inquiries at present.”

“Trouble! Woodhouse, his approbation of the whole; not so openly as he might
have done had her father been out of the room, but speaking plain
enough to be very intelligible to Emma. Mr. He
comes down on Thursday, at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. And no apology left, no message for me. Reynolds’ respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this
intimation of her knowing her master. Pass us, if
you please, Mr. Mr. The post-office has a great charm at one period of our lives. I can only say that there was smoothness
outwardly. She will break it to you better than I can. And if they are, I
only beg you to send them home.”

“No,” cried Mr. Elinor looked as if she wished to
hear more. She is quite a little
creature. But I
cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in London. Instances have been
known of young people passing many, many months successively, without
being at any ball of any description, and no material injury accrue
either to body or mind;—but when a beginning is made—when the
felicities of rapid motion have once been, though slightly, felt—it
must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more. Weston, and generally both,
either at Randalls or here—and as you may suppose, Isabella, most
frequently here. Weston—it is too calm a censure. I always say this is quite one of the evils
of matrimony.”

Emma made as slight a reply as she could; but it was fully sufficient
for Mrs. My brother did not deserve her; he
did not even love her. When this was over, Mr. “We are all unanimous in that wish, I suppose,” said Elinor, “in spite
of the insufficiency of wealth.”

“Oh dear!” cried Margaret, “how happy I should be! But I hardly know—the
misery that you have inflicted—I hardly know what could have made it
worse.”

“Will you repeat to your sister when she is recovered, what I have been
telling you?—Let me be a little lightened too in her opinion as well as
in yours. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this
subject, perhaps it will be advisable for me to state my reasons for
marrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design
of selecting a wife, as I certainly did.”

The idea of Mr. Once
Lucy thought to write to him, but then her spirits rose against that. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to
the will, the difference was great. I was not in a humour to
wait for an opening of yours. You might not see one in a hundred with
_gentleman_ so plainly written as in Mr. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine
about this report? With such a knowledge as
this, it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject. My
father, however, is partial to Mr. Darcy,
though she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his
own words. His gravity and thoughtfulness returned on him
in their fullest extent—and he sat for some time silent and dull. If he should have a numerous family, for
instance, it would be a very convenient addition.”

“To be sure it would.”

“Perhaps, then, it would be better for all parties, if the sum were
diminished one half.—Five hundred pounds would be a prodigious increase
to their fortunes!”

“Oh! In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to
Meryton, and see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed
the scheme. The pleasure is not
enhanced, and the inconvenience is often considerable. I could get the nicest house in the world
for you, next door to ours, in Hanover-square. I
suppose you were very sorry to leave Sussex.”

In some surprise at the familiarity of this question, or at least of
the manner in which it was spoken, Elinor replied that she was. Their manners are not equal to his.”

“Certainly not, at first; but they are very pleasing women when you
converse with them. [Illustration]




CHAPTER LVI. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike: he had a pleasant
countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. My sole dependence was on you;
and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. A very few to-morrows stood
between the young people of Highbury and happiness. Jennings; “Lord! When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always
made part of it, of which officers Mr. You must
have heard every thing to be sure. She begged him to think again on the subject. Do you play and sing, Miss
Bennet?”

“A little.”

“Oh then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Ferrars’s conduct, the
Dashwoods’, and Edward’s. Surry is full of beauties.”

“Oh! In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother’s
words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible
whisper; for to her inexpressible vexation she could perceive that the
chief of it was overheard by Mr. It is so with some men. The child of good fortune! Poor Mr. It would be a compact of
convenience, and the world would be satisfied. But, on the other hand, she could
not admit herself to be unhappy, nor, after the first morning, to be
less disposed for employment than usual; she was still busy and
cheerful; and, pleasing as he was, she could yet imagine him to have
faults; and farther, though thinking of him so much, and, as she sat
drawing or working, forming a thousand amusing schemes for the progress
and close of their attachment, fancying interesting dialogues, and
inventing elegant letters; the conclusion of every imaginary
declaration on his side was that she _refused_ _him_. She mentioned this to her friend, Miss
Lucas. Churchill was no more. As a sort of touchstone, however, she began to speak of his
kindness in conveying the aunt and niece; and though his answer was in
the spirit of cutting the matter short, she believed it to indicate
only his disinclination to dwell on any kindness of his own. “I shall be very glad to look it over,” said he; “but it seems long. For once, Miss Dashwood—it will be the last time, perhaps—let
us be cheerful together. I never could have an idea of any body else—and so I
thought you knew. On this subject, what can you have to
say? Elton for that day. Anne,” cried her sister, “you can talk of nothing but beaux;—you
will make Miss Dashwood believe you think of nothing else.” And then to
turn the discourse, she began admiring the house and the furniture. It was a private resolution of hers, not communicated to him—or at
least not communicated in a way to carry conviction.—Till yesterday, I
know he said he was in the dark as to her plans. Elton?—That will
be a favour indeed! They are good-natured
people, and think little of their own claims; but still they must feel
that any body’s hurrying away is no great compliment; and Miss
Woodhouse’s doing it would be more thought of than any other person’s
in the room. Weston; delighted to see her and receive her approbation, very busy and
very happy in their different way; she, in some little distress; and
he, finding every thing perfect. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance
of good-humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a
woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in
their marriage put an end to all real affection for her. “Can it be
possible that he will marry her?”

“Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we have thought him,” said her
sister. Something new for your coachman and horses to be making their way
through a storm of snow.”

Poor Mr. “Your friend performs delightfully,” he
continued, after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; “and I doubt
not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Not a syllable passed aloud. Bennet. Till I
can forget his father, I can never defy or expose _him_.”

Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than
ever as he expressed them. Elizabeth instantly read her feelings; and, at that moment, solicitude
for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave
way before the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for happiness. Jennings, to the Middletons,
he has been long and intimately known; they equally love and respect
him; and even my own knowledge of him, though lately acquired, is very
considerable; and so highly do _I_ value and esteem him, that if
Marianne can be happy with him, I shall be as ready as yourself to
think our connection the greatest blessing to us in the world. All that is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the
London road. As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more
painful than Elizabeth’s: but whatever she felt she was desirous of
concealing; and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject
was never alluded to. They will one day be Mr. Woodhouse would hardly have ventured had there been
much snow on the ground; but now it is of no consequence. Wickham. Jennings,” said
Marianne, “at least it need not prevent MY accepting her invitation. Frank Churchill
had been at Weymouth at the same time. Elton grew even worse than she had appeared at
first. She respected,
she esteemed, she was grateful to him, she felt a real interest in his
welfare; and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to
depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both
that she should employ the power, which her fancy told her she still
possessed, of bringing on the renewal of his addresses. Lydia--the
humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all--soon swallowed up
every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief,
Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of
several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the
voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke
compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said,--

“I am afraid you have been long desiring my absence, nor have I anything
to plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavailing concern. I know they will; but I am sure I
would not do such a thing for all the world. “I do think,” she continued, “nothing
was ever carried on so sly; for it was but two days before Lucy called
and sat a couple of hours with me. Jennings’s conversation, she was
herself left to quiet reflection. It was a very extraordinary thing! [Illustration]

The day passed much as the day before had done. Woodhouse’s tender habits required almost
every evening throughout the year, he soon afterwards took a hasty
leave, and walked home to the coolness and solitude of Donwell Abbey. Bingley to see you
all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day
before. He is highly esteemed by all the family at the park, and I
never see him myself without taking pains to converse with him.”

“That he is patronised by _you_,” replied Willoughby, “is certainly in
his favour; but as for the esteem of the others, it is a reproach in
itself. I perfectly understand your situation, however,
Miss Woodhouse—(looking towards Mr. Elton; the whole system of
whose treatment of her, by the bye, has ever filled me with indignation
and hatred. Elton gaily,
“in resolving to be always on the watch, and employing my friends to
watch also, that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us.”

In this style she ran on; never thoroughly stopped by any thing till
Mr. Bennet’s ill humour or ill
health. It cannot be long, I think, before she comes.”

A carriage was heard. Sixty-five miles farther than
from Maple Grove to London. It
was all my doing, I know. Such kindness as fell to the share of nobody but me!—No pride, no
hauteur, and your sister just the same—all sweetness and affability!”

Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy still pressed her to
own that she had reason for her happiness; and Elinor was obliged to go
on. Well, well, I only hope it
will last. Her dirty petticoat quite
escaped my notice.”

“_You_ observed it, Mr. No one but Mrs. I warrant you she is a fine size by this time.”

“Mrs. A hasty and imprudent attachment may
arise—but there is generally time to recover from it afterwards. Whereas,
in my opinion, by her taking so much notice of you, and treating you in
this kind of way, she has given you a sort of claim on her future
consideration, which a conscientious woman would not disregard. Elton. Churchill do the same?”

“Depend upon it, Mrs. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now
added that of general unreserve. The bride and her mother could neither
of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near
Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood,
with a good-humoured ease, which she felt very unable to equal in her
replies. Are you
speaking of—Mr. Decidedly, I think, a very gentleman-like man.”

Happily, it was now time to be gone. Knightley warmly, “is, that if he turn out any
thing like it, he will be the most insufferable fellow breathing! You
will be perfectly safe, you know, among your friends.”

“Oh yes, papa. CHAPTER X


Though now the middle of December, there had yet been no weather to
prevent the young ladies from tolerably regular exercise; and on the
morrow, Emma had a charitable visit to pay to a poor sick family, who
lived a little way out of Highbury. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away
with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing that she could not
use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him farther, and
he continued,--

“My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for
every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example
of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced it will add
very greatly to my happiness; and, thirdly, which perhaps I ought to
have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and
recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling
patroness. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?”

Mr. In the present
instance, this last-arrived lady allowed her fancy to so far outrun
truth and probability, that on merely hearing the name of the Miss
Dashwoods, and understanding them to be Mr. CHAPTER XLIX. At any rate, she cannot grow
many degrees worse, without authorizing us to lock her up for the rest
of her life.”

With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion
continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. “There is no persuading you to change your mind, Brandon, I know of
old,” said Sir John, “when once you are determined on anything. “I am, dear Madam,
“Your most obedient
“humble servant,
“JOHN WILLOUGHBY.”


With what indignation such a letter as this must be read by Miss
Dashwood, may be imagined. She hoped no one could have said to her, “How could
you be so unfeeling to your father?—I must, I will tell you truths
while I can.” Miss Bates should never again—no, never! “Whatever you say is always right,” cried Harriet, “and therefore I
suppose, and believe, and hope it must be so; but otherwise I could not
have imagined it. John Knightley presently, with some slyness, “he seems
to have a great deal of good-will towards you.”

“Me!” she replied with a smile of astonishment, “are you imagining me
to be Mr. Weather becomes absolutely of no consequence. Gardiner’s business, on her arrival, was to
distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. “What poor Mrs. Knightley would be forgotten, that is,
supplanted; but this could not be expected to happen very early. Elton sauntering about. Oh, how I wanted you!”

“How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions
in speaking of Wickham to Mr. I
will tell you exactly what I think.”

“As a friend!”—repeated Mr. Weston was
following; but Mrs. Gardiner, whose manners were easy and pleasant, encouraged her
communicativeness by his questions and remarks: Mrs. Upon these
occasions, a lady’s character generally precedes her; and Highbury has
long known that you are a superior performer.”

“Oh! I will put on my things in a moment. And so, it is quite certain he is coming?”

“You may depend on it,” replied the other, “for Mrs. She will be taken good care of. Weston was
wanting _him_ to dance with Mrs. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to
     himself that Wickham’s worthlessness had not been so well known as
     to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or
     confide in him. Nothing but a thorough change of sentiment
could account for it. Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Mr. Do not we rather surpass your expectations? The enclosure of Norland Common, now carrying on, is
a most serious drain. He was well, but so much
engaged with Mr. and Mrs. Her mother’s thoughts she plainly
saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her,
lest she might hear too much. Willoughby.—Remember that you are married. And even Mary could assure her family that she
had no disinclination for it. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture
suitable to the fortune of their proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with
admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly
fine,--with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the
furniture of Rosings. How are they even to be discovered? My illness, I well knew, had been entirely brought on by
myself by such negligence of my own health, as I had felt even at the
time to be wrong. But
these are not Jane’s feelings; she is not acting by design. You have been no friend to Harriet Smith, Emma. “We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice! Knightley—“I do not accuse her of
want of feeling. Elton in particular; but it seemed to her reasonable that at Harriet’s
age, and with the entire extinction of all hope, such a progress might
be made towards a state of composure by the time of Mr. My mother was in hysterics; and though I endeavoured to
give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so much
as I might have done. I had often seen him
in love before. there is nothing in _that_. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might
have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him
at all.”

The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had
been, was very great: but they obligingly satisfied it with the same
kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in
London. She wished him very
well; but he gave her pain, and his welfare twenty miles off would
administer most satisfaction. Richard?—I saw you the other day as you rode through the
town—Mrs. But you do not know _all_. There was a
something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive
and anxious attention, while she added,--

“When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that
either his mind or manners were in a state of improvement; but that,
from knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.”

Wickham’s alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated
look; for a few minutes he was silent; till, shaking off his
embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of
accents,--

“You, who so well know my feelings towards Mr. Bingley was
unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be
civil also, and say what the occasion required. Darcy! Almost as
soon as I entered the house I singled you out as the companion of my
future life. Dixon.”

“And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we must
conclude it to come from the Campbells.”

“No, I am sure it is not from the Campbells. The Parrys and Sandersons luckily are coming tonight you know, and that
will amuse her.”

She then went away, walking on tiptoe out of the room, as if she
supposed her young friend’s affliction could be increased by noise. It was his jealousy of Frank Churchill
that had taken him from the country.—The Box Hill party had decided him
on going away. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as
an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that it
was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either
side, and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Are the Middletons pleasant
people?”

“No, not all,” answered Marianne; “we could not be more unfortunately
situated.”

“Marianne,” cried her sister, “how can you say so? He had only himself to please in his choice: his fortune was his own;
for as to Frank, it was more than being tacitly brought up as his
uncle’s heir, it had become so avowed an adoption as to have him assume
the name of Churchill on coming of age. You wanted me, I know, to say ‘Yes,’
that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always
delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of
their premeditated contempt. Dear Jane,
how shall we ever recollect half the dishes for grandmama? I doubt
whether my own sense would have corrected me without it.”

“Do you?—I have no doubt. Now there would be pleasure in her returning—Every thing would be a
pleasure. Elton was spoken of. I hope, with all my heart, the
young man may be a Weston in merit, and a Churchill in fortune.—But
Harriet Smith—I have not half done about Harriet Smith. Their visitors stayed with them above half an hour; and when they arose
to depart, Mr. A word was
put in for a second young Cox; and at last, Mr. She believed every body spoke well
of him. She promised him again
and again to come—much oftener than he doubted—and was extremely
gratified by such a proof of intimacy, such a distinguishing compliment
as she chose to consider it. It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey, that as soon as she
was satisfied of her father’s comfort, she was glad to leave him, and
look around her; eager to refresh and correct her memory with more
particular observation, more exact understanding of a house and grounds
which must ever be so interesting to her and all her family. Pray do not make any more
matches.”

“I promise you to make none for myself, papa; but I must, indeed, for
other people. They all walked about together, to see that every thing was as it
should be; and within a few minutes were joined by the contents of
another carriage, which Emma could not hear the sound of at first,
without great surprize. The name of
Willoughby, John Willoughby, frequently repeated, first caught my
attention; and what followed was a positive assertion that every thing
was now finally settled respecting his marriage with Miss Grey—it was
no longer to be a secret—it would take place even within a few weeks,
with many particulars of preparations and other matters. I have not forgotten it, I assure
you.—Deceived myself, I did very miserably deceive you—and it will be a
painful reflection to me for ever. Bennet, as soon as they were out of
the house, “as ever I saw. Willoughby is very generally known.”

“It cannot be generally known,” returned Elinor, “for her own family do
not know it.”

He looked surprised and said, “I beg your pardon, I am afraid my
inquiry has been impertinent; but I had not supposed any secrecy
intended, as they openly correspond, and their marriage is universally
talked of.”

“How can that be? he could
spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience.” He thought of
it all day long, and for many days successively, and he did not repent. Darcy!” repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement. At seventeen she was lost to me
for ever. When we met him, he turned back and walked with us; and so
we began talking of my brother and sister, and one thing and another,
and I said to him, ‘So, Colonel, there is a new family come to Barton
cottage, I hear, and mama sends me word they are very pretty, and that
one of them is going to be married to Mr. That will obviate all difficulties you know; and
from _us_ I really think, my dear Jane, you can have no scruple to
accept such an accommodation.”

“You are extremely kind,” said Jane; “but I cannot give up my early
walk. The dream must be
borne with, and Mr. Without considering that it was
not in her mother’s plan to keep any horse, that if she were to alter
her resolution in favour of this gift, she must buy another for the
servant, and keep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stable
to receive them, she had accepted the present without hesitation, and
told her sister of it in raptures. Mr. how shall you employ yourself when you
grow old?”

“If I know myself, Harriet, mine is an active, busy mind, with a great
many independent resources; and I do not perceive why I should be more
in want of employment at forty or fifty than one-and-twenty. How could you behave so unfairly by your sister?”

“Oh, la! I suppose, however—on recollection—that the case may
probably be _this_. If Colonel Campbell is not the person, who can
be?”

“What do you say to Mrs. On the very day of my coming
     home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor. I do not know. and Mrs. I remain, dear sir,
     with respectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your
     well-wisher and friend,

“WILLIAM COLLINS.”

“At four o’clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,”
said Mr. Emma was just describing the nature of her friend’s
complaint;—“a throat very much inflamed, with a great deal of heat
about her, a quick, low pulse, &c. Dashwood and
Elinor were left by themselves, they remained long together in a
similarity of thoughtfulness and silence. The black mare was blameless; _they_ were right who
had named Mrs. Mr. Their opportunity of
acquaintance in the house of Mr. I could wish
the stairs were handsome. Knightley thought he saw another collection of letters anxiously pushed
towards her, and resolutely swept away by her unexamined. “I am glad you approve of what I have done,” said he very comfortably. I almost long to attempt her likeness myself. I can imagine your objection to Harriet Smith. Darcy! Ferrars’s conduct throughout the whole, has been such as every
conscientious, good mother, in like circumstances, would adopt. Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and
seek to clear one, without involving the other. The path just admitted three. and Mrs. She saw the indelicacy of putting
himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions
with his conduct. “I
could see it in his face. Every body must have seen the snow coming on. To Highbury in general it brought no material change. You are not striving to look taller than any body else. And as to the house being a bad one,
I do not know what the Colonel would be at, for it is as good a one as
ever I saw.”

“He spoke of its being out of repair.”

“Well, and whose fault is that? It is not an
employment to which they have been brought up. Jennings soon appeared, and the note being given her, she read it
aloud. Well, Mrs. Well,
Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.”

“It is from Miss Bingley,” said Jane, and then read it aloud. It would
be enough to make them completely easy. The affection of such a man as Mr. Mr. And he was really a very pleasing young man, a
young man whom any woman not fastidious might like. a man does not imagine any such thing. His lady greeted him with some of her
sparkling vivacity. “Your sister, I hope, cannot be offended,” said he, “by the resemblance
I have fancied between her and my poor disgraced relation. She must wait a moment, or he would think her mad. I always said it must be so, at last. I
always thought it such a sweet place, ma’am! You know we have
settled all that already. But so they always are. They have no
indoors man, else they do not want for any thing; and Mrs. So goodby, my dear. My kind friends will
     not hear of my returning home till I am better. “You are much mistaken if
you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. CHAPTER XV


This letter must make its way to Emma’s feelings. But you see, every thing turns out for the best. She was even sensible
of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly
both she and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence
subsisted between Mr. Weston’s visit this morning was in another respect particularly
opportune. I do not know anybody who seems
more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. They would be very much pleased.”

“Me! Who regards me?”

“It would be impossible to go to-morrow. How I catch myself out! CHAPTER XIV


What totally different feelings did Emma take back into the house from
what she had brought out!—she had then been only daring to hope for a
little respite of suffering;—she was now in an exquisite flutter of
happiness, and such happiness moreover as she believed must still be
greater when the flutter should have passed away. That there was
to be such a party had been long generally known: it had even given the
idea of another. John Knightley was
delighted to be of use; any thing of ill health was a recommendation to
her—and though not so fond of a dentist as of a Mr. To suffer you all to be so deceived; to see
your sister—but what could I do? Edward and Lucy should not marry; for I
am sure Mrs. A little while ago, every letter to Isabella
brought an account of fresh gaieties; dinners at Mr. The misfortune of Harriet’s cold had been pretty well gone through
before her arrival. “She must be under some sort
of penance, inflicted either by the Campbells or herself. You only mean, that he intends it.”

“I mean that he has done it,” answered Mr. Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow
one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! and Mrs. “If you are very kind,” said he, “it will be one of the waltzes we
danced last night;—let me live them over again. She was afraid of talking longer of his
friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the
trouble of finding a subject to him. Elton then turned back to
accompany them. They soon outstripped the others; and when they had
reached the carriage, Mr. They are young in the ways
of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that
handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the
plain.”




[Illustration:

     “On the Stairs”
]




CHAPTER XXVII. Either because he did not dance himself, or
because the plan had been formed without his being consulted, he seemed
resolved that it should not interest him, determined against its
exciting any present curiosity, or affording him any future amusement. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected. Elizabeth, immediately recognizing the
livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of surprise
to her relations, by acquainting them with the honour which she
expected. Though uncertain that any one were to blame, she found fault
with every absent friend. These letters were but the vehicle for
gallantry and trick. She
asked no more questions therefore, merely employed her own fancy, and
that soon pointed out to her the probability of its being some money
concern—something just come to light, of a disagreeable nature in the
circumstances of the family,—something which the late event at Richmond
had brought forward. ‘Woman, lovely woman.’ It is such a pretty charade, my dear, that I can
easily guess what fairy brought it.—Nobody could have written so
prettily, but you, Emma.”

Emma only nodded, and smiled.—After a little thinking, and a very
tender sigh, he added,

“Ah! Miss Lucas is married and settled: and one of my
own daughters. Knightley. Towards this home, she began on the approach of January to turn
her thoughts, and thither she one day abruptly, and very unexpectedly
by them, asked the elder Misses Dashwood to accompany her. Ferrars had took
a dislike to me. Darcy contradict it. Weston, stood
for Hartfield; and she trusted to its bearing the same construction
with him. Mrs. Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed
their attachment; but as it was a matter of confidence, one cannot
wonder. It
gave her no surprise that she saw nothing of Mrs. But this is the usual way of
heightening alarm, where there is nothing to be alarmed at in reality.”

“What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is!” said Lucy Steele. I entreat you
not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.”

Mr. No, Mr. The party was to be
our brother and sister, Henry, John—and Miss Smith. My dear Mrs. The whole party walked
about, and looked, and praised again; and then, having nothing else to
do, formed a sort of half-circle round the fire, to observe in their
various modes, till other subjects were started, that, though _May_, a
fire in the evening was still very pleasant. She was a very pretty girl, and her beauty happened to be of a sort
which Emma particularly admired. This was her history; and
particularly interesting it was to Mr. But at first I must
confess, my vanity only was elevated by it. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit, and some
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. I could
not be happy with a man whose taste did not in every point coincide
with my own. Dashwood’s income would be so trifling in
comparison with their own, she should have any handsome article of
furniture. Their first subject was her
sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to
her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her
spirits, there were periods of dejection. Collins.”

“From Mr. His age is only so much beyond hers as
to be an advantage, as to make his character and principles fixed; and
his disposition, I am well convinced, is exactly the very one to make
your sister happy. Pray do
not let them talk of it. Weston’s nature to
imagine that any caprice could be strong enough to affect one so dear,
and, as he believed, so deservedly dear. How do
you do, Mr. I wish you may not
catch cold.”

“Dirty, sir! Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real
occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to
oppose it; for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her
tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it
better that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they could
most trust, should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the
subject. You provide for the family, you know, (with a
smile at his father). He now seated himself by her, and
talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying
at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so
well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much
spirit and flow as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as
well as of Mr. The dining parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease;
card-tables may be placed in the drawing-room; the library may be open
for tea and other refreshments; and let the supper be set out in the
saloon.’ Lady Elliott was delighted with the thought. It was our darling wish that you
might be attached to each other—and we were persuaded that it was so.—
Imagine what we have been feeling on your account.”

“I have escaped; and that I should escape, may be a matter of grateful
wonder to you and myself. Knightley, “she will indulge her even more than
she did you, and believe that she does not indulge her at all. Whenever James goes
over to see his daughter, you know, she will be hearing of us. Now, here will be Mr. Perry had remonstrated with him about it, and told him how shabby it
was in him, their best player, to absent himself, and tried very much
to persuade him to put off his journey only one day; but it would not
do; Mr. In nine cases out of ten, a woman had better show _more_
affection than she feels. My object—my wish—my sole
wish in desiring it—I hope, I believe it is—is to be a means of giving
comfort;—no, I must not say comfort—not present comfort—but conviction,
lasting conviction to your sister’s mind. In everything else she is as
good-natured a girl as ever lived. Weston’s heart and time would be occupied by it. We now come to the point. Their own good-nature
must point out to them the real cruelty of appearing to know any thing
about it when she is present; and the less that may ever be said to
myself on the subject, the more my feelings will be spared, as you my
dear madam will easily believe.”

“Oh! However, she will not find her grandmama at
all deafer than she was two years ago; which is saying a great deal at
my mother’s time of life—and it really is full two years, you know,
since she was here. Churchill! I could not go away you know,
because of the rain; but I did so wish myself anywhere in the world but
there.—Oh! Will not it be a good plan? The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. no, I am sure you are a great deal too kind to—but if you would
just advise me what I had best do—No, no, I do not mean that—As you
say, one’s mind ought to be quite made up—One should not be
hesitating—It is a very serious thing.—It will be safer to say ‘No,’
perhaps.—Do you think I had better say ‘No?’”

“Not for the world,” said Emma, smiling graciously, “would I advise you
either way. Cole’s stables, for I should find the near way quite floated by this
rain. Weston as to
pigeon-pies and cold lamb, when a lame carriage-horse threw every thing
into sad uncertainty. He had met with them in a little perplexity, which must be
laid before Emma. “My dearest Emma,” said he, “for dearest you will always be, whatever
the event of this hour’s conversation, my dearest, most beloved
Emma—tell me at once. Though suspicion was very far
from Miss Bennet’s general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here. Nor was Darcy’s vindication, though
grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery. Something of a very unpleasant nature, I
find, has occurred;—do let me know directly what it is. She
was not in a humour, however, to regard it as an affront, and affecting
to take no notice of what passed, by instantly talking of something
else, she internally resolved henceforward to catch every opportunity
of eyeing the hair and of satisfying herself, beyond all doubt, that it
was exactly the shade of her own. Younge, who was some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was
     dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation, though
     he did not say what. Frank was next to
Emma, Jane opposite to them—and Mr. The wedding was very much like other weddings, where the parties have
no taste for finery or parade; and Mrs. He was satisfied of there being no present danger in
returning home, but no assurances could convince him that it was safe
to stay; and while the others were variously urging and recommending,
Mr. I am very sensible of the honour of
your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than decline
them.”

“I am not now to learn,” replied Mr. Their being fixed, so absolutely fixed, in the same place, was bad for
each, for all three. There, not to be
vulgar, was distinction, and merit. It was too old a story.—Robert Martin had probably ceased to think of
Harriet.—They took a few turns together along the walk.—The shade was
most refreshing, and Emma found it the pleasantest part of the day. They were all thoughtless or indolent. I hope you will
     drink to our good journey. But I gave what I believed the
general opinion, when I called him plain.”

“Well, my dear Jane, I believe we must be running away. Surry is the garden of England.”

“Yes; but we must not rest our claims on that distinction. Weston I should understand whom I
might praise without any danger of being thought extravagant in my
terms.”

Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected from
their knowing each other, which had taken strong possession of her
mind, had ever crossed his; and whether his compliments were to be
considered as marks of acquiescence, or proofs of defiance. He was immediately qualifying himself to form an opinion,
by giving her very proper attention, after the introduction had passed. If she does
wrong, she ought to feel it.”

“She is not entirely without it, I think.”

“I do not see much sign of it. A few inferior dwellings were first to be passed, and then,
about a quarter of a mile down the lane rose the Vicarage, an old and
not very good house, almost as close to the road as it could be. Gardiner was surprised and concerned: but as they were now
approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to
the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out
to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs, to think of
anything else. Bennet was, in fact, too much overpowered to say a great deal while
Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings
found a rapid vent. In the evening, when they were all three together, Marianne began
voluntarily to speak of him again;—but that it was not without an
effort, the restless, unquiet thoughtfulness in which she had been for
some time previously sitting—her rising colour, as she spoke,—and her
unsteady voice, plainly showed. Knightley’s claims on his
brother, or any body’s claims on Isabella, except his own. Cole. He knows
I have a thorough regard for him and all his family, and, I believe,
considers me as one of his best friends. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a
private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before. Did she show it you?”

“Yes, I saw every note that passed.”

“When the first of hers reached me (as it immediately did, for I was in
town the whole time,) what I felt is—in the common phrase, not to be
expressed; in a more simple one—perhaps too simple to raise any
emotion—my feelings were very, very painful.—Every line, every word
was—in the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer, were she here,
would forbid—a dagger to my heart. Weston’s hint. I met him just now. Mr. CHAPTER XIII


There could hardly be a happier creature in the world than Mrs. Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. “You have, I
believe, and know the whole.”

“No, I have not; I know nothing; pray tell me.”

“You are prepared for the worst, I see—and very bad it is. But that is not the
case _here_. I never saw Mrs. [Illustration]

Mr. Her house, her style of
living, all bespeak an exceeding good income; and it is an acquaintance
that has not only been of great use to you hitherto, but in the end may
prove materially advantageous. I do not mean to say that I am
particularly observant or quick-sighted in general, but in such a case
I am sure I could not be deceived.”

“All this,” thought Elinor, “is very pretty; but it can impose upon
neither of us.”

“But what,” said she after a short silence, “are your views? Concession must be
out of the question; but it was time to appear to forget that they had
ever quarrelled; and she hoped it might rather assist the restoration
of friendship, that when he came into the room she had one of the
children with her—the youngest, a nice little girl about eight months
old, who was now making her first visit to Hartfield, and very happy to
be danced about in her aunt’s arms. Mrs. They heard her
with surprise. But amidst your concern for the defects of your nearest relations,
and your displeasure at this representation of them, let it give you
consolation to consider that to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid
any share of the like censure is praise no less generally bestowed on
you and your eldest sister than it is honourable to the sense and
disposition of both. John Knightley. A few minutes made Emma acquainted
with the whole. Their arrival
was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets--and Jane more especially, who
gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had _she_
been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister
must endure. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with
her twice. They must not do less than others, or she
should be exposed to odious suspicions, and imagined capable of pitiful
resentment. A small
green court was the whole of its demesne in front; and a neat wicket
gate admitted them into it. She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished
trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the
attacks of Mr. Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who
consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for
everybody.”

Elizabeth’s spirits were so high on the occasion, that though she did
not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Elizabeth could never
address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over;
and, though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the
sake of what had been rather than what was. It was an
unaccountable business. my
dear, I wish you would not make matches and foretell things, for
whatever you say always comes to pass. She looked at Jane to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly
talking to Bingley. The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants,
and all the articles of plate which Mr. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me. your sister-in-law’s brother, Miss Dashwood? The joy, the gratitude, the exquisite delight of her sensations may be
imagined. Their visitors, except those from Barton Park, were not many; for, in
spite of Sir John’s urgent entreaties that they would mix more in the
neighbourhood, and repeated assurances of his carriage being always at
their service, the independence of Mrs. do anything rather than
marry without affection. Were he ever able to get away, the day would be spent
in coming and returning. Goddard’s experience and
care; but as there must still remain a degree of uneasiness which she
could not wish to reason away, which she would rather feed and assist
than not, she added soon afterwards—as if quite another subject,

“It is so cold, so very cold—and looks and feels so very much like
snow, that if it were to any other place or with any other party, I
should really try not to go out to-day—and dissuade my father from
venturing; but as he has made up his mind, and does not seem to feel
the cold himself, I do not like to interfere, as I know it would be so
great a disappointment to Mr. He
had left her, promising to return; he neither returned, nor wrote, nor
relieved her.”

“This is beyond every thing!” exclaimed Elinor. Elton
since his going away. Anxious and
uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room before the gentlemen
came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil. They were no sooner in the passage than Marianne came
hastily out of the parlour apparently in violent affliction, with her
handkerchief at her eyes; and without noticing them ran up stairs. Take your own.”

But Harriet was in a tremor, and could not touch it; and Emma, never
loth to be first, was obliged to examine it herself. I am sure she
will be as happy to see her friends at Highbury, as they can be to see
her. Goddard to whom he could apply for information of
her relations or friends. and this was the end of it!”

Mrs. Darcy, and devoted all his time to the care of the
Pemberley property. Interested people have perhaps
misrepresented each to the other. Edward Ferrars,” said Elinor, with resolution, “going to be
married?”

“It is not actually settled, but there is such a thing in agitation. Though heavy and feverish, with a pain in her limbs, and a
cough, and a sore throat, a good night’s rest was to cure her entirely;
and it was with difficulty that Elinor prevailed on her, when she went
to bed, to try one or two of the simplest of the remedies. Shall you like to have such a brother?”

“Very, very much. He has imposed on me, but he has not injured me. It has not made him happy. “This little rectory _can_ do no more than make Mr. “He promised to come to me as soon as he could disengage himself from
Knightley; but he and Knightley are shut up together in deep
consultation.—Mr. “I wished very much to call upon you yesterday,” said he, “but it was
impossible, for we were obliged to take Harry to see the wild beasts at
Exeter Exchange; and we spent the rest of the day with Mrs. But of every other neglect
I can believe him capable. Elton engross
Jane Fairfax and slight herself. [Illustration]

Two days after Mr. My dear sir, you really are too bountiful. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively
resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
contrary, of being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,
she urged Jane to borrow Mr. _Her_ wisdom too limited the number of their servants to
three; two maids and a man, with whom they were speedily provided from
amongst those who had formed their establishment at Norland. Can you seriously ask me, Harriet, whether I imagined him attached to
another woman at the very time that I was—tacitly, if not
openly—encouraging you to give way to your own feelings?—I never had
the slightest suspicion, till within the last hour, of Mr. It was reasonable that he should feel
he had been wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising
it; and though she would not place herself as his principal inducement,
she could perhaps believe, that remaining partiality for her might
assist his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be
materially concerned. dear Mrs. After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr. And then, her
reserve—I never could attach myself to any one so completely reserved.”

“It is a most repulsive quality, indeed,” said he. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for
being simply dressed. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how
she liked it. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter
of an hour’s _tête-à-tête_ with Mrs. Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight, to conceal her
distress; and Margaret, understanding some part, but not the whole of
the case, thought it incumbent on her to be dignified, and therefore
took a seat as far from him as she could, and maintained a strict
silence. I have known a great deal of the trouble
of annuities; for my mother was clogged with the payment of three to
old superannuated servants by my father’s will, and it is amazing how
disagreeable she found it. You must
think one five hundred million times more above me than the other. I suppose Lady Middleton
won’t ask us any more this bout. I admired your spirit;
and I dare say we shall get home very well. I know very well that Colonel
Brandon is not old enough to make his friends yet apprehensive of
losing him in the course of nature. But
_sometimes_ they are.”—As she said this, she sunk into a reverie for a
few moments;—but rousing herself again, “Now, Edward,” said she,
calling his attention to the prospect, “here is Barton valley. The whole family
perceived it, and Mrs. said I—I cannot think who you
mean. Weston’s. Knightley among the most attentive, soon drew away half
Emma’s mind; and she fell into a train of thinking on the subject of
Mrs. Yes, that will be quite enough for pleasure. His manner
had no air of study or exaggeration. I say
awakened, because time and London, business and dissipation, had in
some measure quieted it, and I had been growing a fine hardened
villain, fancying myself indifferent to her, and chusing to fancy that
she too must have become indifferent to me; talking to myself of our
past attachment as a mere idle, trifling business, shrugging up my
shoulders in proof of its being so, and silencing every reproach,
overcoming every scruple, by secretly saying now and then, ‘I shall be
heartily glad to hear she is well married.’ But this note made me know
myself better. I will do my
best. Knightley,” said Emma, who had been smiling to herself
through a great part of this speech, “how do you know that Mr. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your
ambition will ever be gratified. Weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion. In such employments as these they were interrupted soon after breakfast
the next day by the entrance of their landlord, who called to welcome
them to Barton, and to offer them every accommodation from his own
house and garden in which theirs might at present be deficient. She was nobody when he married her, barely
the daughter of a gentleman; but ever since her being turned into a
Churchill she has out-Churchill’d them all in high and mighty claims:
but in herself, I assure you, she is an upstart.”

“Only think! “My dear, dear anxious friend,”—said she, in mental soliloquy, while
walking downstairs from her own room, “always overcareful for every
body’s comfort but your own; I see you now in all your little fidgets,
going again and again into his room, to be sure that all is right.” The
clock struck twelve as she passed through the hall. Elton might never get safely
to the end of it, and saw nothing extraordinary in his language. She could therefore only
_look_ her tenderness, and after slightly addressing him, said no more. “Only think of our happening to meet him!—How very odd! In one circumstance only, my Marianne, may your
destiny be different from hers!”




CHAPTER IV. I am impatient to see him.”

“In point of composition,” said Mary, “his letter does not seem
defective. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then too
late to be saving. Darcy’s next step was to make
     your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Gracechurch
     Street the evening before I came home. Wickham wrote to inform me
that, having finally resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should
not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate
pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he could not be
benefited. Nothing could have done it away to my feelings.”

“I know it—I know it,” cried her mother. The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering
visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his
wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of
doing it should be given so soon was such an instance of Lady
Catherine’s condescension as he knew not how to admire enough. That
was the kind action; that was the noble benevolence and generosity;
that was the service which made me begin to feel how superior he was to
every other being upon earth.”

“Good God!” cried Emma, “this has been a most unfortunate—most
deplorable mistake!—What is to be done?”

“You would not have encouraged me, then, if you had understood me? Such was Jane Fairfax’s history. Cole, I
really was ashamed to look at our new grand pianoforte in the
drawing-room, while I do not know one note from another, and our little
girls, who are but just beginning, perhaps may never make any thing of
it; and there is poor Jane Fairfax, who is mistress of music, has not
any thing of the nature of an instrument, not even the pitifullest old
spinet in the world, to amuse herself with.—I was saying this to Mr. I am sure Edward Ferrars is not well. He was particularly grave the whole morning. You must at least have felt that my being
acquainted with it could not add to its safety.”

As she said this, she looked earnestly at Lucy, hoping to discover
something in her countenance; perhaps the falsehood of the greatest
part of what she had been saying; but Lucy’s countenance suffered no
change. I shall never forget his
flying Henry’s kite for him that very windy day last Easter—and ever
since his particular kindness last September twelvemonth in writing
that note, at twelve o’clock at night, on purpose to assure me that
there was no scarlet fever at Cobham, I have been convinced there could
not be a more feeling heart nor a better man in existence.—If any body
can deserve him, it must be Miss Taylor.”

“Where is the young man?” said John Knightley. The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every
female of the family. Happily he was not farther from
approving matrimony than from foreseeing it.—Though always objecting to
every marriage that was arranged, he never suffered beforehand from the
apprehension of any; it seemed as if he could not think so ill of any
two persons’ understanding as to suppose they meant to marry till it
were proved against them. Bingley’s heart were entertained. “Pray do. Kitty, a fair but frozen maid,
    Kindled a flame I yet deplore,
The hood-wink’d boy I called to aid,
Though of his near approach afraid,
    So fatal to my suit before. My reasons for
believing it are briefly these:--It does not appear to me that my hand
is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer
would be any other than highly desirable. You will be delighted with them I am
sure. Gardiner’s
door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival: when
they entered the passage, she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,
looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and
lovely as ever. My brother and sister will be enchanted with this place. She had had many a hint from Mr. _I_ who knew what he was. And so Patty told me,
and I was excessively shocked indeed! This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister’s having the
pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.”

“Oh, yes! My good opinion once lost is lost for
ever.”

“_That_ is a failing, indeed!” cried Elizabeth. Jennings came home, though she returned from seeing people
whom she had never seen before, and of whom therefore she must have a
great deal to say, her mind was so much more occupied by the important
secret in her possession, than by anything else, that she reverted to
it again as soon as Elinor appeared. I knew who it came from. They are gone off together from Brighton. “Mr. Jane Fairfax’s perception seemed to accompany his; her
comprehension was certainly more equal to the covert meaning, the
superior intelligence, of those five letters so arranged. Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse
danced—for doing that in which she need not blush to compare herself
with Jane Fairfax—and even for simple dancing itself, without any of
the wicked aids of vanity—to assist him first in pacing out the room
they were in to see what it could be made to hold—and then in taking
the dimensions of the other parlour, in the hope of discovering, in
spite of all that Mr. I was breakfasting
at the Ellisons,—and her letter, with some others, was brought to me
there from my lodgings. why don’t he repair it?—who should do
it but himself?”

They were interrupted by the servant’s coming in to announce the
carriage being at the door; and Mrs. Collins for
having spoken so sensibly, and observed, in a half-whisper to Lady
Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man. She resigned herself at first to all the misery of her
situation; and happy had it been if she had not lived to overcome those
regrets which the remembrance of me occasioned. Weston instantly
seized the opportunity of going on. Well, Miss Woodhouse, is he like what you expected? “He was four years with my uncle, who lives at Longstaple, near
Plymouth. But I am
afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means
intend; for he would certainly think the better of me if, under such a
circumstance, I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I
could.”

“Would Mr. “For my own part,” she rejoined, “I must confess that I never could see
any beauty in her. She said no more, other
subjects took their turn; and the rest of the dinner passed away; the
dessert succeeded, the children came in, and were talked to and admired
amid the usual rate of conversation; a few clever things said, a few
downright silly, but by much the larger proportion neither the one nor
the other—nothing worse than everyday remarks, dull repetitions, old
news, and heavy jokes. Elton—

“I have perhaps given her a little more decision of character, have
taught her to think on points which had not fallen in her way before.”

“Exactly so; that is what principally strikes me. Oh no; we all felt that
we were going to be only half a mile apart, and were sure of meeting
every day.”

“Dear Emma bears every thing so well,” said her father. In a short time Elinor saw Willoughby
quit the room by the door towards the staircase, and telling Marianne
that he was gone, urged the impossibility of speaking to him again that
evening, as a fresh argument for her to be calm. One thing,
especially, I remember, because it served to identify the man still
more:—as soon as the ceremony was over, they were to go to Combe Magna,
his seat in Somersetshire. I would
rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. Bingley was
everything that was charming, except the professed lover of her
daughter. No more would Sir John, nor my daughters, for they are all very
thoughtful and considerate; especially if I give them a hint, as I
certainly will. _She_ will not be able to help calling.”

“She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”

But, in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this
point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley’s being
withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which
convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely
hopeless. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no
otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen; but I am very
far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. what’s his name--that tall, proud man.”

“Good gracious! She
would keep the peace if possible; and there was something honourable
and valuable in the strong domestic habits, the all-sufficiency of home
to himself, whence resulted her brother’s disposition to look down on
the common rate of social intercourse, and those to whom it was
important.—It had a high claim to forbearance. Opposition on so tender a subject would only attach
her the more to her own opinion. My mind was more
agreeably engaged. And Jane declares—Well!—(as soon as
she was within the door) Well! Well, (returning to
the room,) I have not been able to succeed. The general prejudice against Mr. That was your name for him, was it?”

“You do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as I am; but still
you must, at least I hope you must, think the better of him for it. Marianne, who had seen him from the
window, and who hated company of any kind, left the room before he
entered it. I thought I should have died. Mr. I wanted
to keep it from Jane’s knowledge; but, unluckily, I had mentioned it
before I was aware.”

Miss Bates had just done as Patty opened the door; and her visitors
walked upstairs without having any regular narration to attend to,
pursued only by the sounds of her desultory good-will. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly
useless; for, of course, they were to have a son. Mr. When at last she returned to the unconscious Marianne, she found her
just awaking, refreshed by so long and sweet a sleep to the extent of
her hopes. Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. I detest jargon of every kind, and sometimes I
have kept my feelings to myself, because I could find no language to
describe them in but what was worn and hackneyed out of all sense and
meaning.”

“I am convinced,” said Edward, “that you really feel all the delight in
a fine prospect which you profess to feel. Her own situation gained in the comparison; for while she
could _esteem_ Edward as much as ever, however they might be divided in
future, her mind might be always supported. The first half hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she
should suffer from the change of room; and she removed, at his desire,
to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be farther from the
door. Mrs. But you know what I am.—You hear nothing but truth from me.—I
have blamed you, and lectured you, and you have borne it as no other
woman in England would have borne it.—Bear with the truths I would tell
you now, dearest Emma, as well as you have borne with them. It drew from her, however,
the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done
before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in the
country at present. But pride--where there is a real
superiority of mind--pride will be always under good regulation.”

Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile. Only think of their coming so suddenly! Knightley gravely said,

“This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted, and Mr. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia’s general
behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of
such a woman as Mrs. Yes, she will do for him very well. You, whom she had known from an infant, whom she
had seen grow up from a period when her notice was an honour, to have
you now, in thoughtless spirits, and the pride of the moment, laugh at
her, humble her—and before her niece, too—and before others, many of
whom (certainly _some_,) would be entirely guided by _your_ treatment
of her.—This is not pleasant to you, Emma—and it is very far from
pleasant to me; but I must, I will,—I will tell you truths while I can;
satisfied with proving myself your friend by very faithful counsel, and
trusting that you will some time or other do me greater justice than
you can do now.”

While they talked, they were advancing towards the carriage; it was
ready; and, before she could speak again, he had handed her in. As that was the
case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it
necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could it
apparently be to anyone, that the good opinion, which all the
neighbourhood had of him, should then be overthrown? I owe all that I know
of it to another, not to you.”

Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. and Mrs. Warmth and
tenderness of heart, with an affectionate, open manner, will beat all
the clearness of head in the world, for attraction, I am sure it will. “Well, Lizzy,” continued her mother, soon afterwards, “and so the
Collinses live very comfortable, do they? I
will take it home with me at night.”

But that would not do. Darcy’s further notice:
though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite
disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. “Indeed, Mr. In
the present instance, it was sickness and poverty together which she
came to visit; and after remaining there as long as she could give
comfort or advice, she quitted the cottage with such an impression of
the scene as made her say to Harriet, as they walked away,

“These are the sights, Harriet, to do one good. Had I but explained
some part of it only--some part of what I learnt, to my own family! and Mrs. Knightley’s known wishes, in paying that attention
to Miss Fairfax, which was every way her due; had she tried to know her
better; had she done her part towards intimacy; had she endeavoured to
find a friend there instead of in Harriet Smith; she must, in all
probability, have been spared from every pain which pressed on her
now.—Birth, abilities, and education, had been equally marking one as
an associate for her, to be received with gratitude; and the other—what
was she?—Supposing even that they had never become intimate friends;
that she had never been admitted into Miss Fairfax’s confidence on this
important matter—which was most probable—still, in knowing her as she
ought, and as she might, she must have been preserved from the
abominable suspicions of an improper attachment to Mr. All that were good would be withdrawn; and if to these
losses, the loss of Donwell were to be added, what would remain of
cheerful or of rational society within their reach? If
you had only sent him to Westminster as well as myself, instead of
sending him to Mr. Knightley had walked in then, soon after tea, and
dissipated every melancholy fancy. “She thinks herself wrong, then, for having
consented to a private engagement?”

“Wrong! But I do not
think it is at all a likely thing for him to do. She was a great talker upon little matters, which exactly
suited Mr. I knew he would!”




CHAPTER XII


One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely
satisfactory to Emma—its being fixed for a day within the granted term
of Frank Churchill’s stay in Surry; for, in spite of Mr. Goddard, three ladies almost always at
the service of an invitation from Hartfield, and who were fetched and
carried home so often, that Mr. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to visit
him, if you do not.”

“You are over scrupulous, surely. When Marianne
was recovered, the schemes of amusement at home and abroad, which Sir
John had been previously forming, were put into execution. It
was very well known that no affection was ever supposed to exist
between the children of any man by different marriages; and why was he
to ruin himself, and their poor little Harry, by giving away all his
money to his half sisters? And I am
not only, not going to be married, at present, but have very little
intention of ever marrying at all.”

“Ah!—so you say; but I cannot believe it.”

“I must see somebody very superior to any one I have seen yet, to be
tempted; Mr. It was really a very
handsome thought. “I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when
you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first
place?”

“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which
laid the foundation. Elinor turned
involuntarily to Marianne, to see whether it could be unobserved by
her. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago
asserted his blamelessness in the affair;--that, proud and repulsive as
were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their
acquaintance--an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much
together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways--seen anything
that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust--anything that spoke him
of irreligious or immoral habits;--that among his own connections he was
esteemed and valued;--that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a
brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his
sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling;--that had his
actions been what Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of
everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and
that friendship between a person capable of it and such an amiable man
as Mr. She was faithful to her word; and when Willoughby called at the
cottage, the same day, Elinor heard her express her disappointment to
him in a low voice, on being obliged to forego the acceptance of his
present. Wickham. Weston might be growing older ten years
hence—to have his fireside enlivened by the sports and the nonsense,
the freaks and the fancies of a child never banished from home; and
Mrs. Bennet to her husband, “and all the others equally well
married, I shall have nothing to wish for.”

In a few days Mr. Mr. Who do you think is here?—Miss
Woodhouse and Miss Smith; so kind as to call to hear the new
pianoforte. I believe it
is the only way that Mr. Every body who saw it was pleased,
but Mr. You
     will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. No thanks to his gallantry for that. But, as I directly said to my mother, I
am not in the least surprised at it; from his style of education, it
was always to be expected. But still
I cannot imagine she would not be persuaded.”

Harriet was soon back again, and the proposal almost immediately made;
and she had no scruples which could stand many minutes against the
earnest pressing of both the others. Collins, “I am particularly obliged to you
for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so
material a step without her Ladyship’s concurrence.”

“You cannot be too much on your guard. Should not you, Marianne? Such a countenance, such manners, and so extremely accomplished
for her age! First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. It is Mr. Mr. Too much indebted to the event for his acquittal.—No judge of his
own manners by you.—Always deceived in fact by his own wishes, and
regardless of little besides his own convenience.—Fancying you to have
fathomed his secret. Jane
came back delighted yesterday. Do
you often dance at St. I
speak from experience. Some lavender drops, however, which she was at length
persuaded to take, were of use; and from that time till Mrs. “If I,” said Mr. Witness this very time. She resolved
to give her the information herself; and therefore charged Mr. There is nothing else to be done. I
see nobody else looking like her!—I must go and ask her whether it is
an Irish fashion. Jennings, with a wine-glass, full of something, in her hand. If you _can_
pity me, Miss Dashwood, pity my situation as it was _then_. CHAPTER XII


Till now that she was threatened with its loss, Emma had never known
how much of her happiness depended on being _first_ with Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what
they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and
so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them. When I first
became intimate in your family, I had no other intention, no other view
in the acquaintance than to pass my time pleasantly while I was obliged
to remain in Devonshire, more pleasantly than I had ever done before. She could never quit him.” Part only of this
answer, however, was admitted. and Mrs. They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and her
uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by
themselves. I think him a
very handsome young man, and his manners are precisely what I like and
approve—so truly the gentleman, without the least conceit or puppyism. With his notions of dignity, he would
probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak
and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning. Knightley, “but I meant no
reflection on any body. But if you are really innocent and
     ignorant, I must be more explicit. Quite the queen
of the evening!—Well, here we are at the passage. But he is a pleasant, good humoured fellow, and has got the
nicest little black bitch of a pointer I ever saw. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life.”

“I would wish not to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak
what I think.”

“I know you do: and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. Whatever be
his pursuits, his eagerness in them should know no moderation, and
leave him no sense of fatigue.”

“Aye, aye, I see how it will be,” said Sir John, “I see how it will be. He began to suspect him of some double dealing in
his pursuit of Emma. Cole had made such a point—and Mrs. I shall write to Mrs. I am always watching her to admire; and I do pity her from my
heart.”

Mr. Nothing occurred during the next three or four days, to make Elinor
regret what she had done, in applying to her mother; for Willoughby
neither came nor wrote. ‘Ah! We talked it all over with Mr. He _looked_ all the astonishment
which such unexpected, such unthought-of information could not fail of
exciting; but he said only these two words,—

“Colonel Brandon!”

“Yes,” continued Elinor, gathering more resolution, as some of the
worst was over, “Colonel Brandon means it as a testimony of his concern
for what has lately passed—for the cruel situation in which the
unjustifiable conduct of your family has placed you—a concern which I
am sure Marianne, myself, and all your friends, must share; and
likewise as a proof of his high esteem for your general character, and
his particular approbation of your behaviour on the present occasion.”

“Colonel Brandon give _me_ a living!—Can it be possible?”

“The unkindness of your own relations has made you astonished to find
friendship any where.”

“No,” replied he, with sudden consciousness, “not to find it in _you;_
for I cannot be ignorant that to you, to your goodness, I owe it all.—I
feel it—I would express it if I could—but, as you well know, I am no
orator.”

“You are very much mistaken. The last
night’s ball seemed lost in the gipsies. A great deal of very reasonable, very just displeasure I
had to persuade away. Frank Churchill, in my opinion, as his father
thinks. She
would not listen, therefore, to her daughter’s proposal of being carried
home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think
it at all advisable. Darcy had been
standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and
Mr. Allow me to congratulate you on having so
respectable and well-judging a friend, and to join in his wish that the
living—it is about two hundred a-year—were much more considerable, and
such as might better enable you to—as might be more than a temporary
accommodation to yourself—such, in short, as might establish all your
views of happiness.”

What Edward felt, as he could not say it himself, it cannot be expected
that any one else should say for him. As I tell Mr. I wanted her to stay at home and rest this
morning, but she would come with us; she longed so much to see you
all!”

Mrs. Dixon, I understand, has no
remarkable degree of personal beauty; is not, by any means, to be
compared with Miss Fairfax.”

“Oh! Ford, could not you?”

“It is not worth while, Harriet, to give Mrs. Every sentence of
kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. Weston had been shewing them all to him, and now he
would shew them all to Emma;—fortunate in having no other resemblance
to a child, than in a total want of taste for what he saw, for he was
slow, constant, and methodical.—Before this second looking over was
begun, however, Emma walked into the hall for the sake of a few
moments’ free observation of the entrance and ground-plot of the
house—and was hardly there, when Jane Fairfax appeared, coming quickly
in from the garden, and with a look of escape.—Little expecting to meet
Miss Woodhouse so soon, there was a start at first; but Miss Woodhouse
was the very person she was in quest of. But if
otherwise, if the regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or
unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a
first interview with its object, and even before two words have been
exchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had given
somewhat of a trial to the latter method, in her partiality for Wickham,
and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorize her to seek the other
less interesting mode of attachment. He was neither so
unjust, nor so ungrateful, as to leave his estate from his nephew;—but
he left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the value of the
bequest. She finds Miss Pope a treasure. Had she followed Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the
daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria’s astonishment at her
being so thin and so small. How the trampers might have behaved, had the young ladies been more
courageous, must be doubtful; but such an invitation for attack could
not be resisted; and Harriet was soon assailed by half a dozen
children, headed by a stout woman and a great boy, all clamorous, and
impertinent in look, though not absolutely in word.—More and more
frightened, she immediately promised them money, and taking out her
purse, gave them a shilling, and begged them not to want more, or to
use her ill.—She was then able to walk, though but slowly, and was
moving away—but her terror and her purse were too tempting, and she was
followed, or rather surrounded, by the whole gang, demanding more. How can you?—But the time will come I hope...I am sure you
will like him.”

“I do not doubt it,” replied he, rather astonished at her earnestness
and warmth; for had he not imagined it to be a joke for the good of her
acquaintance in general, founded only on a something or a nothing
between Mr. There now, _you_ are going to laugh at me
too. after the note I sent him this morning, and
the message he returned, that he should certainly be at home till one.”

“Donwell!” cried his wife.—“My dear Mr. Miss Woodhouse, how ungrateful I have been!”

Such expressions, assisted as they were by every thing that look and
manner could do, made Emma feel that she had never loved Harriet so
well, nor valued her affection so highly before. Are you going much farther?”

“No, I should have turned in a moment.”

And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage
together. “If that is all, you may be satisfied already; for Marianne _does_, she
has _long_ forgiven you.”

“Has she?” he cried, in the same eager tone. Bennet, more than
once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her. Jennings. While Sir William was with them, Mr. I cannot be forced
into genius and eloquence.”

“You have no ambition, I well know. Churchill could be reconciled to the engagement’s becoming known;
as, considering every thing, she thought such a visit could not be paid
without leading to reports:—but Mr. The acquaintance she had already formed
were unworthy of her. Under a bright mid-day sun, at almost Midsummer, Mr. Collins’s respectability, and
Charlotte’s prudent, steady character. But could it be so? “Implacable resentment
_is_ a shade in a character. She had a sister married to a Mr. She was sitting by Edward, and in taking his tea from Mrs. He was on foot, and after looking very respectfully at
her, looked with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion. I knew you would wish it. The second day brought them into
the cherished, or the prohibited, county of Somerset, for as such was
it dwelt on by turns in Marianne’s imagination; and in the forenoon of
the third they drove up to Cleveland. Jennings’s
speech, neither did she think it worth inquiring into; and therefore
only replied to its conclusion. Everything nourishes what is
strong already. Bennet’s
acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurances of his eagerness to
promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties
that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. “Ah! Towards the end of Jane’s
second song, her voice grew thick. She wanted to be alone. Mr. They were confined for the evening at different tables; and she had
nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side
of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself. Mrs. Sir John was a
sportsman, Lady Middleton a mother. Elton were talked over, Emma could
fairly surrender all her attention to the pleasantness of her
neighbour. Oh! It ought to
be a first object, as I am sure poor Miss Taylor’s always was with me. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly
know what I have written.”

Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing
what she felt, Elizabeth, on finishing this letter, instantly seized the
other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it
had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first. It would look odd to be
entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet, for the advantage of
_some_, conversation ought to be so arranged as that they may have the
trouble of saying as little as possible.”

“Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you
imagine that you are gratifying mine?”

“Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a great
similarity in the turn of our minds. He saw his son every year in
London, and was proud of him; and his fond report of him as a very fine
young man had made Highbury feel a sort of pride in him too. In
short, I will do my best.”

“Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very
often. Accordingly, with a mixture of the serious and the
playful, which she hoped would best suit his half and half state, she
replied,

“I am very much astonished, Mr. “Oh, my love,” cried Mrs. “I believe I have
been very rude; but really Miss Fairfax has done her hair in so odd a
way—so very odd a way—that I cannot keep my eyes from her. Mrs. “But what are his manners on more intimate acquaintance? Bennet was
forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means
entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to
continue at least a twelvemonth. It
was adventuring too far, assuming too much, making light of what ought
to be serious, a trick of what ought to be simple. She perceived him soon afterwards looking at herself, and
speaking familiarly to her brother; and had just determined to find out
his name from the latter, when they both came towards her, and Mr. Harriet was to be there in the evening, and the
Bateses. Or Miss Bates? Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and
was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on Elizabeth, when they
were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger; and Elizabeth
happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other,
was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas. He
tried to smile as he replied, “your sister’s engagement to Mr. Elton meant to be considered. [Illustration:

“His parting obeisance”
]




CHAPTER XXXVII. I was obliged to confess one
thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. It must be very clever, or he would not have brought it. Mrs. Jennings directly gave her the gratifying assurance that she
certainly would _not_, and Miss Steele was made completely happy. You know it is not
sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.”

Occupied in observing Mr. When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. “I suppose you will go and stay with your brother and sister, Miss
Dashwood, when they come to town,” said Lucy, returning, after a
cessation of hostile hints, to the charge. “And then,” said she, “if
that very improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be
able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner
himself. With such a confederacy against her—with a knowledge so intimate of his
goodness—with a conviction of his fond attachment to herself, which at
last, though long after it was observable to everybody else—burst on
her—what could she do? A worthy employment for a young lady’s mind! She looked at Jane, and
smiled, and shook her head, by turns. Goddard. I left them there
and came on to Hartfield, impatient for your opinion, and hoping you
might be persuaded to join them and give your advice on the spot. There is nobody in
Highbury who deserves him—and he has been here a whole year, and has
fitted up his house so comfortably, that it would be a shame to have
him single any longer—and I thought when he was joining their hands
to-day, he looked so very much as if he would like to have the same
kind office done for him! Painful recollections will
intrude, which cannot, which ought not to be repelled. We measured the
dining-room, and found it would hold exactly eighteen couple, and the
affair was arranged precisely after my plan. Woodhouse?—I am so glad
to hear such a good account. I
am resolved to have some in an ornament for the head. I quite detest the man.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV. GARDINER.”


The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits,
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the
greatest share. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with
     who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the
     world I love, and he is an angel. Colonel Campbell rather preferred an olive. The former was for Sir John’s gratification, the latter for
that of his lady. She heard of her walking with
the Eltons, sitting with the Eltons, spending a day with the Eltons! If I had followed her
judgment, and subdued my spirits to the level of what she deemed
proper, I should have escaped the greatest unhappiness I have ever
known.—We quarrelled.— Do you remember the morning spent at
Donwell?—_There_ every little dissatisfaction that had occurred before
came to a crisis. Is there one among the sex who would not
protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman? Two
days of joyful security were immediately followed by the over-throw of
every thing. I could not
allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months
last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. And after all, what did it signify to my
character in the opinion of Marianne and her friends, in what language
my answer was couched? I shall leave you together. _Too
much_, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort
springs from a breach of promise, for I ought not to have mentioned the
subject? Knightley, nearly at the same time; “you are not often
deficient; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension. Young ladies of her age are sometimes
a little difficult to manage; and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she
may like to have her own way.”

As she spoke, she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner
in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to
give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other
got pretty near the truth. Willoughby may undoubtedly have
very sufficient reasons for his conduct, and I will hope that he has. They were both so truly
respectable in their happiness, so disinterested in every sensation;
thought so much of Jane; so much of every body, and so little of
themselves, that every kindly feeling was at work for them. “You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion. Yes, I am sure you are
much too reasonable. As for Colonel Brandon, she was
not only ready to worship him as a saint, but was moreover truly
anxious that he should be treated as one in all worldly concerns;
anxious that his tithes should be raised to the utmost; and secretly
resolved to avail herself, at Delaford, as far as she possibly could,
of his servants, his carriage, his cows, and his poultry. Perhaps other people have said so
before, but no one with such justice. Mr. I always take the part of my
own sex. Collins sat
down to quadrille; and as Miss De Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the
two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. He was invited to contribute any really
good enigmas, charades, or conundrums that he might recollect; and she
had the pleasure of seeing him most intently at work with his
recollections; and at the same time, as she could perceive, most
earnestly careful that nothing ungallant, nothing that did not breathe
a compliment to the sex should pass his lips. Much beyond
my hopes. Or have I said all this to no purpose? He still loves me, and we
are engaged.”

Jane looked at her doubtingly. Bennet to his wife, as they were at
breakfast the next morning, “that you have ordered a good dinner to-day,
because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.”

“Who do you mean, my dear? Ferrars suffered, when first Fanny broke it to her, is
not to be described. But now I can
carry her a most satisfactory account of both.”




CHAPTER XXXIV. She had found in
her every thing that could tend to make a farther connection between
the families undesirable. Woodhouse, to betray any
imperfection which could be concealed. Who is to dance?”

“Who! She saw it all with a clearness which had never blessed
her before. As the sun is out, I believe I had
better take my three turns while I can. Calling back
the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless an
accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and
mistress home instantly. You have made yourself
too clear. Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by any
peculiar graces of person or address. His resentment was in proportion to
the distress of his circumstances--and he was doubtless as violent in
his abuse of me to others as in his reproaches to myself. Bragge’s; but Mrs. Elton’s manners are not perfect,” replied Emma; “but where there
is a wish to please, one ought to overlook, and one does overlook a
great deal. Hurst began again,--

“I have an excessive regard for Jane Bennet,--she is really a very sweet
girl,--and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. Weston and his son. This was Mr. Astonishment, that would have been as
painful as it was strong, had not an immediate disbelief of the
assertion attended it. Do you know it?—Cramer.—And here
are a new set of Irish melodies. Had I been in love, I could not
have been more wretchedly blind. Elton. And as to its
recommendations to _you_, I fancy I need not take much pains to dwell
on them. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has
not sixpence of his own. One does not, you know,
after a time. Woodhouse’s kindness, felt his particular claim on her to leave her
neat parlour, hung round with fancy-work, whenever she could, and win
or lose a few sixpences by his fireside. dear, no,” said her companion. Elton’s acquaintance. But by an appeal to her affection for
her mother, by representing the inconveniences which that indulgent
mother must draw on herself, if (as would probably be the case) she
consented to this increase of establishment, Marianne was shortly
subdued; and she promised not to tempt her mother to such imprudent
kindness by mentioning the offer, and to tell Willoughby when she saw
him next, that it must be declined. Woodhouse, with
a sigh. The
possibility of meeting Mr. Harriet’s features are very delicate, which makes a
likeness difficult; and yet there is a peculiarity in the shape of the
eye and the lines about the mouth which one ought to catch.”

“Exactly so—The shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth—I have
not a doubt of your success. The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally blind him to every
thing but her beauty and good nature; but the four succeeding
years—years, which if rationally spent, give such improvement to the
understanding, must have opened his eyes to her defects of education,
while the same period of time, spent on her side in inferior society
and more frivolous pursuits, had perhaps robbed her of that simplicity
which might once have given an interesting character to her beauty. They all seemed to remember the day,
the hour, the party, the occasion—to feel the same consciousness, the
same regrets—to be ready to return to the same good understanding; and
they were just growing again like themselves, (Harriet, as Emma must
suspect, as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy,) when
the carriage reappeared, and all was over. Pain is no expiation. very well,” said Mrs. (with a
little sigh of sentiment). She felt it so; and though, in looking forward,
neither rational happiness, nor worldly prosperity could be justly
expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had feared, only
two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had gained. Mrs. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far
as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. This was the season of happiness to Marianne. I think you must know Hartfield
enough to comprehend that.”

“A straightforward, open-hearted man like Weston, and a rational,
unaffected woman like Miss Taylor, may be safely left to manage their
own concerns. Weston’s ball in view at least, there
had been a great deal of insensibility to other things; but it was now
too evident that she had not attained such a state of composure as
could stand against the actual approach—new carriage, bell-ringing, and
all. John
Knightley seemed early to devote himself to the business of being
agreeable. dear; I was so miserable! The charm of an object to occupy the many vacancies of Harriet’s
mind was not to be talked away. Mrs. The Picture, elegantly framed, came safely to hand soon after Mr. “Where is Marianne? I always thought they were very unfit to have
the charge of her; but I was over-ruled, as I always am. Jane
said so. I
should like the work exceedingly, if she would allow me a share in it.”

“Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you for your help,” cried Lucy,
“for I find there is more to be done to it than I thought there was;
and it would be a shocking thing to disappoint dear Annamaria after
all.”

“Oh! Have you had any
flirting? It was hardly right; but it
had been so strong an idea, that it would escape her, and his
submission to all that she told, was a compliment to her penetration,
which made it difficult for her to be quite certain that she ought to
have held her tongue. I wonder he does not marry, to secure a
lasting convenience of that kind. As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chiefly expressed, not
by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by
stiffness of manner and resentful silence. A
short account of myself, I believe, will be necessary, and it _shall_
be a short one. I should not wonder, if he was to be in the greatest
passion!—and Mr. “I
am sorry it went off. Willoughby had spent the preceding
evening with them, and Margaret, by being left some time in the parlour
with only him and Marianne, had had opportunity for observations,
which, with a most important face, she communicated to her eldest
sister, when they were next by themselves. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she
had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she
could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness
of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave
of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice his own happiness to
the caprice of their inclinations. But Mrs. But
Mrs. But are you pleased, Jane? What is before me, I see. Emma saw how Mr. Darcy should hear the
first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her
disapprobation. Not that _I_ think
Charlotte so _very_ plain; but then she is our particular friend.”

“She seems a very pleasant young woman,” said Bingley. And now to be sure you will be in no _hurry_ to be gone. Weston to implore her assistance, “Would not she give him her
support?—would not she add her persuasions to his, to induce Miss
Woodhouse not to go to Mrs. Edward, who had till then looked any
where, rather than at her, saw her hurry away, and perhaps saw—or even
heard, her emotion; for immediately afterwards he fell into a reverie,
which no remarks, no inquiries, no affectionate address of Mrs. Lady Catherine, it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr. It was a great comfort to her to be
sure of exciting no interest in _one_ person at least among their
circle of friends: a great comfort to know that there was _one_ who
would meet her without feeling any curiosity after particulars, or any
anxiety for her sister’s health. You must know best what will be its effect;
but had I not seriously, and from my heart believed it might be of
service, might lessen her regrets, I would not have suffered myself to
trouble you with this account of my family afflictions, with a recital
which may seem to have been intended to raise myself at the expense of
others.”

Elinor’s thanks followed this speech with grateful earnestness;
attended too with the assurance of her expecting material advantage to
Marianne, from the communication of what had passed. John Dashwood, is the person I mean; you must allow
that I am not likely to be deceived as to the name of the man on who
all my happiness depends.”

“It is strange,” replied Elinor, in a most painful perplexity, “that I
should never have heard him even mention your name.”

“No; considering our situation, it was not strange. If he had been anxious for secrecy, he would not
have left the paper while I was by; but he rather pushed it towards me
than towards you. But suspicion of something unpleasant is the
inevitable consequence of such an alteration as we just witnessed in
him. A real injury to the children—a
most mortifying change, and material loss to them all;—a very great
deduction from her father’s daily comfort—and, as to herself, she could
not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey. My esteem for your whole family is
    very sincere; but if I have been so unfortunate as to give rise to
    a belief of more than I felt, or meant to express, I shall reproach
    myself for not having been more guarded in my professions of that
    esteem. But I will shew her greater
attention than I have done.”

Every invitation was successful. “Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him
at his word about fishing, as he might change his mind another day, and
warn me off his grounds.”

Elizabeth felt that they had entirely mistaken his character, but said
nothing. And dear Emma, too!—What a dreadful loss to you both!—I have been so
grieved for you.—I could not imagine how you could possibly do without
her.—It is a sad change indeed.—But I hope she is pretty well, sir.”

“Pretty well, my dear—I hope—pretty well.—I do not know but that the
place agrees with her tolerably.”

Mr. Emma saw its artifice, and returned to her first surmises. Then
continuing his former tone, he said, “And yet this house you would
spoil, Mrs. It distressed her
a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the
pales opposite the Parsonage. Put them next to your great-uncle the
judge. He
observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and
in a tone which had something of real regret, that it “was a very long
time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her;” and, before she could
reply, he added, “It is above eight months. Collins’s present
circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom
they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were
exceedingly fair. _Then_, if I had not been
bound to silence, perhaps nothing could have kept me entirely—not even
what I owed to my dearest friends—from openly showing that I was _very_
unhappy.”

Marianne was quite subdued. John Dashwood, as the nieces of the
gentleman who for many years had had the care of her brother, might not
have done much, however, towards procuring them seats at her table; but
as Lady Middleton’s guests they must be welcome; and Lucy, who had long
wanted to be personally known to the family, to have a nearer view of
their characters and her own difficulties, and to have an opportunity
of endeavouring to please them, had seldom been happier in her life,
than she was on receiving Mrs. The late owner of this estate was a single
man, who lived to a very advanced age, and who for many years of his
life, had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister. She gave him credit for stationing himself where he might gaze
and gaze again without offence; but was really obliged to put an end to
it, and request him to place himself elsewhere. I made sure of its being nothing but a
common love letter, and you know young people like to be laughed at
about them. Knightley’s visits; now she could
talk, and she could listen with true happiness, unchecked by that sense
of injustice, of guilt, of something most painful, which had haunted
her when remembering how disappointed a heart was near her, how much
might at that moment, and at a little distance, be enduring by the
feelings which she had led astray herself. Frank’s was the first idea; and his
the greatest zeal in pursuing it; for the lady was the best judge of
the difficulties, and the most solicitous for accommodation and
appearance. Weston, laughing, “perhaps the greatest good he could
do them, would be to give Jane such a respectable home.”

“If it would be good to her, I am sure it would be evil to himself; a
very shameful and degrading connexion. It would amuse away the difficulties of her part, and lessen
the irksomeness of Miss Smith’s.”

Mr. which Edward ought to have inquired about,
but never did. What a meeting for her, when she
first sees my aunt!”

“We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,” said
Jane: “I hope and trust they will yet be happy. “John is in such spirits today!” said she, on his taking Miss Steeles’s
pocket handkerchief, and throwing it out of window—“He is full of
monkey tricks.”

And soon afterwards, on the second boy’s violently pinching one of the
same lady’s fingers, she fondly observed, “How playful William is!”

“And here is my sweet little Annamaria,” she added, tenderly caressing
a little girl of three years old, who had not made a noise for the last
two minutes; “And she is always so gentle and quiet—Never was there
such a quiet little thing!”

But unfortunately in bestowing these embraces, a pin in her ladyship’s
head dress slightly scratching the child’s neck, produced from this
pattern of gentleness such violent screams, as could hardly be outdone
by any creature professedly noisy. The high
downs which invited them from almost every window of the cottage to
seek the exquisite enjoyment of air on their summits, were a happy
alternative when the dirt of the valleys beneath shut up their superior
beauties; and towards one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret one
memorable morning direct their steps, attracted by the partial sunshine
of a showery sky, and unable longer to bear the confinement which the
settled rain of the two preceding days had occasioned. She was sitting near the window, and as soon as Sir John
perceived her, he left the rest of the party to the ceremony of
knocking at the door, and stepping across the turf, obliged her to open
the casement to speak to him, though the space was so short between the
door and the window, as to make it hardly possible to speak at one
without being heard at the other. John Dashwood now installed herself mistress of Norland; and her
mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors. no—what an impudent dog I was!—How could I dare—”

But he laughed so heartily at the recollection, that Emma could not
help saying,

“I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time, you
had very great amusement in tricking us all.—I am sure you had.—I am
sure it was a consolation to you.”

“Oh! “So early too! John Dashwood said nothing; but her husband civilly
hoped that she would not be settled far from Norland. Affecting that air of playfulness, therefore, which is delightful in a
woman one loves, she opened the letter directly, and read its contents. Reflection
had given calmness to her judgment, and sobered her own opinion of
Willoughby’s deserts;—she wished, therefore, to declare only the simple
truth, and lay open such facts as were really due to his character,
without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy astray. Remember that she is one of a
large family; that as to fortune it is a most eligible match; and be
ready to believe, for everybody’s sake, that she may feel something like
regard and esteem for our cousin.”

“To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else
could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that
Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her
understanding than I now do of her heart. You ought certainly to forgive them as
a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their
names to be mentioned in your hearing.’ _That_ is his notion of
Christian forgiveness! To the possibility of motives unanswerable in themselves, though
unavoidably secret for a while? It is a
mere nothing after all; and not the least draught from the stairs.”

“I wish,” said Mrs. I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget
myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce me
to unfold to any human being. WESTON CHURCHILL. Cole’s did not seem to contradict, that when
he next entered Highbury he would bring his bride. Churchill, the grief of her husband—her mind glanced over them both
with awe and compassion—and then rested with lightened feelings on how
Frank might be affected by the event, how benefited, how freed. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been
     acting wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her
     brother is the cause of it. but dear Miss Woodhouse, she is now in such retirement, such
obscurity, so thrown away.—Whatever advantages she may have enjoyed
with the Campbells are so palpably at an end! Gardiner
was so little to be trusted.”

“You must not blame my aunt. “The smallness of the house,” said she, “I cannot imagine any
inconvenience to them, for it will be in proportion to their family and
income.”

By which the Colonel was surprised to find that _she_ was considering
Mr. You
must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.”

“Is that his design in settling here?”

“Design? He could not
say that he was sorry on his own account; his very cheerful look would
have contradicted him if he had; but he said, and very steadily, that
he was sorry for the disappointment of the others, and with
considerable kindness added,

“You, Emma, who have so few opportunities of dancing, you are really
out of luck; you are very much out of luck!”

It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax, to judge of her honest
regret in this woeful change; but when they did meet, her composure was
odious. Long will do any such thing. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in town two days. In the intervals of her discourse with
Mrs. An opportunity of coming hither, though with Mrs. Shall we walk, Augusta?”

“With all my heart. Kitty is slight and delicate, and Mary studies so much that her hours of
repose should not be broken in on. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when
they last met, were plainly expressed. He really
believed that, were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he
should be in some danger. “If I had
set my heart on Mr. I thought—but I beg your pardon, perhaps I have been
under a mistake. Darcy’s sister, as, by Wickham’s account, she would make him abundantly
regret what he had thrown away. I met _one_ as I
came—Madness in such weather!—absolute madness!”

Emma listened, and looked, and soon perceived that Frank Churchill’s
state might be best defined by the expressive phrase of being out of
humour. He seemed really anxious to accommodate them and the whole of
his letter was written in so friendly a style as could not fail of
giving pleasure to his cousin; more especially at a moment when she was
suffering under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of her nearer
connections. He knows it to be so, by his promises and messages; but if he
wished to do it, it might be done. He was silent
and grave. As she thought less of his inebriety, she thought more of his
inconstancy and presumption; and with fewer struggles for politeness,
replied,

“It is impossible for me to doubt any longer. Weston’s manners,” said Emma, “were always particularly good. Weston could say of their exactly equal size,
that it was a little the largest. What! Weston—(laughing affectedly) I must protest against that.—A most
dangerous precedent indeed!—I beg you will not let your neighbours
follow your example.—Upon my word, if this is what I am to expect, we
married women must begin to exert ourselves!—Oh! Exactly so indeed!”

“It is very pretty,” said Mr. Elton took a great fancy to Jane Fairfax; and from the first. She had all the
natural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself. Ten
couple may stand here very well.”

Emma demurred. To know that he has not
thrown himself away, is such a comfort!—She does seem a charming young
woman, just what he deserves. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia
exclaimed. But she was not at all sorry that she
had abused the housekeeper the other day.—Shocking plan, living
together. Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?”

“You can _now_ have nothing further to say,” she resentfully answered. She was first called to observe and approve him farther, by a
reflection which Elinor chanced one day to make on the difference
between him and his sister. Darcy in
anything, and persevered, therefore, in requiring an explanation of his
two motives. Dashwood had
determined that it would be better for Marianne to be any where, at
that time, than at Barton, where every thing within her view would be
bringing back the past in the strongest and most afflicting manner, by
constantly placing Willoughby before her, such as she had always seen
him there. But is it
certain, absolutely certain?”

“Oh, yes! Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. Her face was crimsoned
over, and she exclaimed, in a voice of the greatest emotion, “Good God! All were struck with the stranger’s air, all
wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible
to find out, led the way across the street, under pretence of wanting
something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the
pavement, when the two gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same
spot. Everybody said how well
she looked; and Mr. In hastily forming and giving his opinion of other
people, in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of undivided
attention where his heart was engaged, and in slighting too easily the
forms of worldly propriety, he displayed a want of caution which Elinor
could not approve, in spite of all that he and Marianne could say in
its support. he was to come there with Wickham, you know. It is too unlikely, for me to believe it without proof.”

“How odd you are! He had by that time reached it also; and, holding out
a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty
composure, “I have been walking in the grove some time, in the hope of
meeting you. Marianne pressed her hand and replied,—

“You are very good.—The future must be my proof. She must see you.”

“Is she unwell?”

“No, no, not at all—only a little agitated. He has a great regard for
the Bateses, you know, independent of Jane Fairfax—and is always glad
to shew them attention. I know enough of music to speak decidedly on that point. She will be married at sixteen! Their eyes
instantly met, and the cheeks of each were overspread with the deepest
blush. but why so?—I can hardly imagine that any thing which pleases
or amuses you, should not please and amuse me too.”

“There is one subject,” he replied, “I hope but one, on which we do not
think alike.” He paused a moment, again smiling, with his eyes fixed on
her face. Very thoughtful of
Colonel Campbell, was not it?—He knew Miss Fairfax could have no music
here. Ferrars, and
Edward’s immediately walking in. Woodhouse, with a melancholy shake of the head and a
sigh, called his daughter’s attention to the sad change at Hartfield
since she had been there last. It was
dreadfully mortifying; but Mr. Mr. Poor Edward! I have a warm unguarded temper, and I
may perhaps have sometimes spoken my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too
freely. Wickham! “Success supposes endeavour. On that subject poor Miss Bates
was very unhappy, and very communicative; Jane would hardly eat any
thing:—Mr. From the moment of
learning that Lucy was married to another, that Edward was free, to the
moment of his justifying the hopes which had so instantly followed, she
was every thing by turns but tranquil. I am sure I
would rather do any thing in the world than be thought so by a person
whose good opinion is so well worth having as yours. When once it had
been read, there was no doing any thing, but lament and exclaim. Did not I see them
together in Devonshire every day, and all day long; and did not I know
that your sister came to town with me on purpose to buy wedding
clothes? A report of a most
alarming nature reached me two days ago. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving
him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and
hypocrisy of my son-in-law. Collins listened to her with
the determined air of following his own inclination, and when she ceased
speaking, replied thus,--

“My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world of your
excellent judgment in all matters within the scope of your
understanding, but permit me to say that there must be a wide difference
between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity and those
which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider
the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank
in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the
same time maintained. Weston was afraid of draughts for the young people in that passage; and
neither Emma nor the gentlemen could tolerate the prospect of being
miserably crowded at supper. I managed it extremely well.”

Emma could not doubt. The insipidity, and yet the
noise--the nothingness, and yet the self-importance, of all these
people! and Mrs. Knightley, but I am
a very slow walker, and my pace would be tedious to you; and, besides,
you have another long walk before you, to Donwell Abbey.”

“Thank you, sir, thank you; I am going this moment myself; and I think
the sooner _you_ go the better. “Oftentimes very
convenient, no doubt, but never pleasing. It soon appeared that London was not the place for her. Had Miss Bingley known what
pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have
refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose
Elizabeth, by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed
her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in
Darcy’s opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies
and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected with
that corps. “Robert Martin has no great loss—if he can but think so; and I hope it
will not be long before he does. So suddenly to be gone! She received him with
her very best politeness, which he returned with as much more,
apologizing for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with
her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be
justified by his relationship to the young ladies who introduced him to
her notice. I often
tell young ladies, that no excellence in music is to be acquired without
constant practice. She knew not how to support herself,
and, from actual weakness, sat down and cried for half an hour. Knightley; “I have it from Robert
Martin himself. As it was, I
was only betrayed into paying a most unreasonable visit. Knightley been so dear to her, as every feeling
declared him now to be? Elizabeth did all she could to
shield him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to
keep him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might
converse without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings
arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its
pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward
with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so
little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their
family party at Pemberley. Did not I do
right?—And I suppose you had no great difficulty—You did not find him
very unwilling to accept your proposal?”

“No, ma’am; _that_ was not very likely.”

“Well, and how soon will he be ready?—For it seems all to depend upon
that.”

“Really,” said Elinor, “I know so little of these kind of forms, that I
can hardly even conjecture as to the time, or the preparation
necessary; but I suppose two or three months will complete his
ordination.”

“Two or three months!” cried Mrs. He inquired how far
Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in
a hesitating manner how long Mr. The looks and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed,
except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. She expressly conditioned, however, for paying no visits, and
would do no more than accompany them to Gray’s in Sackville Street,
where Elinor was carrying on a negotiation for the exchange of a few
old-fashioned jewels of her mother. I do not think it
is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. If I could
be sure of the rooms being thoroughly aired—but is Mrs. Mrs. Had you not been really
amiable you would have hated me for it: but in spite of the pains you
took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and
in your heart you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously
courted you. Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and
that she could not leave her. But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. About the third or fourth morning after their being thus resettled in
Berkeley Street, Mrs. Mrs. Careless of her happiness,
thinking only of my own amusement, giving way to feelings which I had
always been too much in the habit of indulging, I endeavoured, by every
means in my power, to make myself pleasing to her, without any design
of returning her affection.”

Miss Dashwood, at this point, turning her eyes on him with the most
angry contempt, stopped him, by saying,

“It is hardly worth while, Mr. Not these two or three years, perhaps.”

“Write to me very often, my dear.”

“As often as I can. “That sweet, amiable Jane Fairfax!” said Mrs. When she became
sensible of this, it struck her that she could not be very much in
love; for in spite of her previous and fixed determination never to
quit her father, never to marry, a strong attachment certainly must
produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings. How much may
not a few months do?”

“I think,” replied Edward, “that I may defy many months to produce any
good to me.”

This desponding turn of mind, though it could not be communicated to
Mrs. The naïveté of
Miss Smith’s manners—and altogether—Oh, it is most admirable! She was convinced that Margaret had fixed
on a person whose name she could not bear with composure to become a
standing joke with Mrs. The
night following this affair—I was to go the next morning—was spent by
me in deliberating on what my future conduct should be. Anywhere, so that Jane is not in a
draught. John Dashwood,
that not even her curiosity to see how she looked after the late
discovery, nor her strong desire to affront her by taking Edward’s
part, could overcome her unwillingness to be in her company again. Now, an attachment to Harriet Smith
would have nothing to encounter. You mentioned it as what was
certainly to be very soon. “That is all very proper and civil, I am sure,” said Mrs. I think it would
not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.”

“Upon my word,” said her Ladyship, “you give your opinion very decidedly
for so young a person. Did he know of
their intending to go off? Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at
Longbourn. By Jane this attention was received with the greatest
pleasure; but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of
everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;
though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value, as arising,
in all probability, from the influence of their brother’s admiration. Her
astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by
every review of it. not handsome—not at all handsome. Weston (poor Miss Taylor that was) would suffer
it.”

“Ah! Annesley, a
genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind
of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the
others; and between her and Mrs. “You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into
Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I have no thoughts of matrimony at
present.”

He was too angry to say another word; her manner too decided to invite
supplication; and in this state of swelling resentment, and mutually
deep mortification, they had to continue together a few minutes longer,
for the fears of Mr. Do you not consider that a connection with you
must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?”

“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. No motive can
excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. They came
from Birmingham, which is not a place to promise much, you know, Mr. Could there be
finer symptoms? Anxiety and hope now
oppressed her in equal degrees, and left her no moment of tranquillity
till the arrival of Mr. Weston was disengaged and Emma began again—“Mr. She follows him to
town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he
does not care about you.”

Jane shook her head. Why should not they explore to Box Hill though the
Sucklings did not come? _She_ disapproved them, which ought to have been
enough.—My plea of concealing the truth she did not think
sufficient.—She was displeased; I thought unreasonably so: I thought
her, on a thousand occasions, unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious: I
thought her even cold. Collins as the wisest
thing she ever did. Ferrars, with the utmost liberality,
will come forward, and settle on him a thousand a year, if the match
takes place. She could only give him a look; but it was such a look as she
thought must restore him to his senses, and then left the sofa,
removing to a seat by her sister, and giving her all her attention. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first
convenient pause turned to him with an arch smile, and said,--

“You mean to frighten me, Mr. She was less handsome than her brother, but there
was sense and good-humour in her face, and her manners were perfectly
unassuming and gentle. Here,—probably this basket with pink ribbon. Jenkinson
expressed her fears of Miss De Bourgh’s being too hot or too cold, or
having too much or too little light. Palmer’s dressing-room. And this, I fear, is all that can be said for the conduct of one, who
was at once her uncle and guardian. We shall have no
occasion to open the windows at all—not once the whole evening; and it
is that dreadful habit of opening the windows, letting in cold air upon
heated bodies, which (as you well know, sir) does the mischief.”

“Open the windows!—but surely, Mr. Palmer!”

“Upon my honour I did.—I met Colonel Brandon Monday morning in
Bond-street, just before we left town, and he told me of it directly.”

“You surprise me very much. [Illustration]

Miss Bingley’s letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. So well had they recommended themselves to Lady Middleton, so agreeable
had their assiduities made them to her, that though Lucy was certainly
not so elegant, and her sister not even genteel, she was as ready as
Sir John to ask them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street; and it
happened to be particularly convenient to the Miss Steeles, as soon as
the Dashwoods’ invitation was known, that their visit should begin a
few days before the party took place. We consulted together, however, as to what should be
done, and at last she determined to send for Edward. Woodhouse’s carriage.—It was
all arranged, it was all completed, and Harriet was safe in Brunswick
Square. I was glad you made her play so much, for having no
instrument at her grandmother’s, it must have been a real indulgence.”

“I am happy you approved,” said Emma, smiling; “but I hope I am not
often deficient in what is due to guests at Hartfield.”

“No, my dear,” said her father instantly; “_that_ I am sure you are
not. She had no doubt of Harriet’s
happiness with any good-tempered man; but with him, and in the home he
offered, there would be the hope of more, of security, stability, and
improvement. He begged to know further particulars of what he was
indebted to his brother; but was too angry with Lydia to send any
message to her. Frank Churchill, of whom, in the
eagerness of her conversation with Mrs. But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I
acknowledge?”

“That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. The possibility
of the young man’s coming to Mrs. And if he were to be lost to them for Harriet’s
sake; if he were to be thought of hereafter, as finding in Harriet’s
society all that he wanted; if Harriet were to be the chosen, the
first, the dearest, the friend, the wife to whom he looked for all the
best blessings of existence; what could be increasing Emma’s
wretchedness but the reflection never far distant from her mind, that
it had been all her own work? Knightley came in, and distressing thoughts were put by. That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go off with a flourish of
malice against him in her message by Thomas, was perfectly clear to
Elinor; and Edward himself, now thoroughly enlightened on her
character, had no scruple in believing her capable of the utmost
meanness of wanton ill-nature. “It would be something remarkable, now,” he continued, “something
droll, if Fanny should have a brother and I a sister settling at the
same time. Knightley would
soon be over. You appear to me
a little hoarse already, and when you consider what demand of voice and
what fatigues to-morrow will bring, I think it would be no more than
common prudence to stay at home and take care of yourself to-night.”

Mr. I am sure
there is nobody’s praise that could give us so much pleasure as Miss
Woodhouse’s. It was
growing late, and Miss Bates became anxious to get home, on her
mother’s account. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have
     been able to do something for him, and his situation must have been
     benefited by marriage. Knightley’s not dancing than by any thing else.—There
he was, among the standers-by, where he ought not to be; he ought to be
dancing,—not classing himself with the husbands, and fathers, and
whist-players, who were pretending to feel an interest in the dance
till their rubbers were made up,—so young as he looked!—He could not
have appeared to greater advantage perhaps anywhere, than where he had
placed himself. To Mr. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done
gracefully. Elton. Knightley, one moment more; something of consequence—so
shocked!—Jane and I are both so shocked about the apples!”

“What is the matter now?”

“To think of your sending us all your store apples. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked
features, which might once have been handsome. A child on the watch, came towards them to beg; and
Miss Bickerton, excessively frightened, gave a great scream, and
calling on Harriet to follow her, ran up a steep bank, cleared a slight
hedge at the top, and made the best of her way by a short cut back to
Highbury. Whatever
money he might come into when his father died, whatever his share of
the family property, it is, I dare say, all afloat, all employed in his
stock, and so forth; and though, with diligence and good luck, he may
be rich in time, it is next to impossible that he should have realised
any thing yet.”

“To be sure, so it is. But he is, beyond all comparison,
the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached to
me--I believe it will be better that he should not. Weston felt when _she_ was approaching Randalls. He had rather hoped that all his wife’s
views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found that he
had a very different story to hear. You will tell me, I know, that this may or
may _not_ have happened; but I will listen to no cavil, unless you can
point out any other method of understanding the affair as satisfactory
at this. I am come here to bespeak Fanny
a seal. It gives me pain to
speak ill of a Darcy; but she is too much like her brother,--very, very
proud. what will become of me? Knightley. There was nothing of presumption
or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into
silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the
other had ever seen him. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. I told
you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again,
and you will find me as good as my word. Gardiner could not
     be seen; and Mr. I do not want to say more than is
necessary—I am too much ashamed of having given way as I have done, and
I dare say you understand me.”

“Yes,” said Emma, “I hope I do.”

“How I could so long a time be fancying myself!...” cried Harriet,
warmly. She could not think of Darcy’s leaving Kent without remembering that his
cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear
that he had no intentions at all, and, agreeable as he was, she did not
mean to be unhappy about him. I
shall now know how to act. Your mother
will secure to you, in time, that independence you are so anxious for;
it is her duty, and it will, it must ere long become her happiness to
prevent your whole youth from being wasted in discontent. “I never saw you wear a ring before, Edward,” she cried. Darcy with him, and sat down
again by her sister. “What!” he exclaimed—“Improve this dear cottage! We will not be
parted. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen,
and, I understand, highly accomplished. They shew her to the greatest advantage. Mr. Through letters,
whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated; and every
succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance. William did not seem to mind it
himself, he was so pleased to think his master had sold so many; for
William, you know, thinks more of his master’s profit than any thing;
but Mrs. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never
saw anything of it. If it were to be shared with the woman he loved,
he could not think any man to be pitied for having that house. Cole had many to agree with her; every body who spoke on the
subject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell,
and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made; and there were
enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way, and still
listen to Mrs. It is a beautiful moonlight night; and so mild that I
must draw back from your great fire.”

“But you must have found it very damp and dirty. Mind me, now, if they an’t married by Mid-summer. At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixed. She must
tell you herself what she is—yet not by word, for never was there a
human creature who would so designedly suppress her own merit.—Since I
began this letter, which will be longer than I foresaw, I have heard
from her.—She gives a good account of her own health; but as she never
complains, I dare not depend. But,
Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it. Of Mr. Mr. Martin’s
prose. my mother’s
spectacles. They were relieved however, not by her
own recollection, but by the good will of Lucy, who believed herself to
be inflicting a severe disappointment when she told her that Edward
certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday, and even hoped to
be carrying the pain still farther by persuading her that he was kept
away by the extreme affection for herself, which he could not conceal
when they were together. Yet such was the case. Palmer asked me if I
would go with him to Barton. Harris appeared. Goddard’s,” said she presently, “was not so
pleasant as I had hoped—‘Not better’ was _my_ answer.”

His face lengthened immediately; and his voice was the voice of
sentiment as he answered. Jennings declared her danger most imminent—the
Palmers are all gone off in a fright, &c. Martin to every other person; if you think him the most
agreeable man you have ever been in company with, why should you
hesitate? Marianne would have thought herself very inexcusable had she been able
to sleep at all the first night after parting from Willoughby. This violent oppression of spirits continued the whole evening. It is not to be supposed
that there was much affection in the case.”

“That is not an unnatural surmise,” said Fitzwilliam; “but it is
lessening the honour of my cousin’s triumph very sadly.”

This was spoken jestingly, but it appeared to her so just a picture of
Mr. Nothing can be
more simple, you see. She was obliged
to leave the door ajar as she found it; but she fully intended that Mr. Had he been in his right senses, he could
not have thought of such a thing as begging you to give away half your
fortune from your own child.”

“He did not stipulate for any particular sum, my dear Fanny; he only
requested me, in general terms, to assist them, and make their
situation more comfortable than it was in his power to do. Palmer’s barouche stopped at the door, and
in a few minutes she came laughing into the room: so delighted to see
them all, that it was hard to say whether she received most pleasure
from meeting her mother or the Miss Dashwoods again. Gardiner
expressed a wish of going round the whole park, but feared it might be
beyond a walk. He walked away again
immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of
mind: Charlotte tried to console her. Jennings, most attentively civil; and on Colonel
Brandon’s coming in soon after himself, he eyed him with a curiosity
which seemed to say, that he only wanted to know him to be rich, to be
equally civil to _him_. calls me the child of good
fortune. Oh! Perry. It was quite a
sudden thing our coming at all, and I knew nothing of it till the
carriage was coming to the door, and then Mr. Donavan says there is nothing materially
to be apprehended; her constitution is a good one, and her resolution
equal to any thing. It convinced her that
accident only could discover to Mr. Emma could not but feel all
this; and then, her face—her features—there was more beauty in them
altogether than she had remembered; it was not regular, but it was very
pleasing beauty. Darcy and their niece, directed their observation towards
each with an earnest, though guarded, inquiry; and they soon drew from
those inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew what
it was to love. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade
in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the
honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty. Had he married a more amiable woman, he might have
been made still more respectable than he was:—he might even have been
made amiable himself; for he was very young when he married, and very
fond of his wife. At one moment she
was absolutely indifferent to the observation of all the world, at
another she would seclude herself from it for ever, and at a third
could resist it with energy. This was the occurrence:—The Coles had been settled some years in
Highbury, and were very good sort of people—friendly, liberal, and
unpretending; but, on the other hand, they were of low origin, in
trade, and only moderately genteel. Mrs. Mr. I wish you had been there, my
dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. It will save me a world of trouble
and economy. Elton, whose judgment never fails her, saw
farther than I did. We must
all feel for him; and the more so, because it is totally out of our
power to assist him.”

“Poor young man!” cried Mrs. “What can bring her here so often?” said Marianne, on her leaving them. But I did not love only him; and while the comfort of others was
dear to me, I was glad to spare them from knowing how much I felt. The affection of the whole family, the warm attachment of Miss Campbell
in particular, was the more honourable to each party from the
circumstance of Jane’s decided superiority both in beauty and
acquirements. He was
brought, not from doubt or suspense, but from misery to happiness;—and
the change was openly spoken in such a genuine, flowing, grateful
cheerfulness, as his friends had never witnessed in him before. Her skin was very brown, but,
from its transparency, her complexion was uncommonly brilliant; her
features were all good; her smile was sweet and attractive; and in her
eyes, which were very dark, there was a life, a spirit, an eagerness,
which could hardly be seen without delight. We have
never been there above once since the new approach was made; but still
I have no doubt that James will take you very safely. These were claims which
he did not learn to overlook, though some years passed away from the
death of poor Fairfax, before his own return to England put any thing
in his power. Jennings, who knew nothing of all this, who knew only that the
Colonel continued as grave as ever, and that she could neither prevail
on him to make the offer himself, nor commission her to make it for
him, began, at the end of two days, to think that, instead of
Midsummer, they would not be married till Michaelmas, and by the end of
a week that it would not be a match at all. Elton, you know, (recollecting herself,) is out of the
question: and I do _not_ wish to see any such person. Be that as it may, she saw him go
with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia’s infamy must
produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched
business. Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance of her table, and of
all her domestic arrangements; and from this kind of vanity was her
greatest enjoyment in any of their parties. Exquisite, quite exquisite!—Still, however,
having proceeded so far, one is unwilling to give the matter up. Her heart was really grieved. We have neither of us any thing to tell; you, because you do not
communicate, and I, because I conceal nothing.”

Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in herself, which she was
not at liberty to do away, knew not how, under such circumstances, to
press for greater openness in Marianne. Supposing it possible
that they are not engaged, what distress would not such an enquiry
inflict! It makes me envious and miserable;—I
who have never seen it! “His being so sure of succeeding was wrong,” said she, “and certainly
ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his
disappointment.”

“Indeed,” replied Elizabeth, “I am heartily sorry for him; but he has
other feelings which will probably soon drive away his regard for me. The bare possibility of it acted as a farther irritation on her
spirits; and her being left in solitary grandeur, even supposing the
omission to be intended as a compliment, was but poor comfort. Elton is so
good to the poor!” she found something else must be done. She did not think he was quite so hardened as his wife, though
growing very like her;—_she_ spoke some of her feelings, by observing
audibly to her partner,

“Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith!—Very good-natured,
I declare.”

Supper was announced. It
could be protracted no longer. “It is but a cottage,” she continued, “but I hope to see many of my
friends in it. Mr. She thanked him for it with all her heart, spoke of Edward’s principles
and disposition with that praise which she knew them to deserve; and
promised to undertake the commission with pleasure, if it were really
his wish to put off so agreeable an office to another. “How despicably have I acted!” she cried. Her exertions did not stop here; for she soon afterwards felt herself
so heroically disposed as to determine, under pretence of fetching
Marianne, to leave the others by themselves; and she really did it, and
_that_ in the handsomest manner, for she loitered away several minutes
on the landing-place, with the most high-minded fortitude, before she
went to her sister. The first mentioned was,
that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information was
as sincere as her brother’s in sending it. Jennings had to say upon the subject, with an
unchanging complexion, dissented from her in nothing, and was heard
three times to say, “Yes, ma’am.”—She listened to her praise of Lucy
with only moving from one chair to another, and when Mrs. The real evils, indeed, of Emma’s situation were the power of having
rather too much her own way, and a disposition to think a little too
well of herself; these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy to
her many enjoyments. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he
spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his
inquiries as to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her stay
in Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the
distraction of his thoughts. Elinor avoided it upon
principle, as tending to fix still more upon her thoughts, by the too
warm, too positive assurances of Marianne, that belief of Edward’s
continued affection for herself which she rather wished to do away; and
Marianne’s courage soon failed her, in trying to converse upon a topic
which always left her more dissatisfied with herself than ever, by the
comparison it necessarily produced between Elinor’s conduct and her
own. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on
the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating
her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of her
family. Ferrars. How much you
must have gone through!”

Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their
conversation, which had been passing while Mr. “But it is not merely this affair,” she continued, “on which my dislike
is founded. Much as I abominate
writing, I would not give up Mr. that would be terrible, indeed,” said Miss Steele. It is infinitely too bad. So you may think what a blow it was to all her vanity and pride. “I do not know.—One of the Otways.—Not Frank;—it is not Frank, I assure
you. At any rate I shall
expect you to-morrow. “Not go to town!” cried Mrs. She met
him with a hand that would be taken, and a voice that expressed the
affection of a sister. If, indeed, it could be restored
to our poor little boy—”

“Why, to be sure,” said her husband, very gravely, “that would make
great difference. What is right to be done
cannot be done too soon. True, true, you are acquainted with Miss
Fairfax; I remember you knew her at Weymouth, and a fine girl she is. Her heart beat
quick on hearing Harriet’s footstep and voice; so, she supposed, had
poor Mrs. “I am all astonishment. He is perfectly amiable. Emma could not bear to give him pain. Jennings
at the door of her carriage, and repeating his hope of being able to
call on them the next day, took leave. You have deprived the best years of his life of that
independence which was no less his due than his desert. “I have only to add, my dear Willoughby, that at Barton cottage you
will always be welcome; for I will not press you to return here
immediately, because you only can judge how far _that_ might be
pleasing to Mrs. _Now_
I shall really be very happy to walk into the same room with you.”

“Nonsensical girl!” was his reply, but not at all in anger. But there was one method so
direct, so simple, and in her opinion so eligible of knowing the real
state of the affair, and of instantly removing all mystery, that she
could not help suggesting it to her mother. There does seem to be a
something in the air of Hartfield which gives love exactly the right
direction, and sends it into the very channel where it ought to flow. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. Marianne was, of course, kept in ignorance of all these arrangements. Elinor could hardly believe this to be true, as it seemed very unlikely
that Willoughby should propose, or Marianne consent, to enter the house
while Mrs. An abominable puppy!—You know
who I mean (nodding to her husband). In the course of the
spring she must return their civilities by one very superior party—in
which her card-tables should be set out with their separate candles and
unbroken packs in the true style—and more waiters engaged for the
evening than their own establishment could furnish, to carry round the
refreshments at exactly the proper hour, and in the proper order. Bingley does not know the whole of his
history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have
principally offended Mr. Suckling, sometimes flies about. Her heart had been long growing
kinder towards Jane; and this picture of her present sufferings acted
as a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion, and left her nothing
but pity; and the remembrance of the less just and less gentle
sensations of the past, obliged her to admit that Jane might very
naturally resolve on seeing Mrs. I hope you do not retract what you then said.”

“No, indeed,” cried Emma, most happy to begin, “not in the least. We copied it from the
Elegant Extracts. The next remove was to the house; they must all go in and eat;—and they
were all seated and busy, and still Frank Churchill did not come. How to understand the deceptions she had
been thus practising on herself, and living under!—The blunders, the
blindness of her own head and heart!—she sat still, she walked about,
she tried her own room, she tried the shrubbery—in every place, every
posture, she perceived that she had acted most weakly; that she had
been imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree; that she had
been imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying; that she was
wretched, and should probably find this day but the beginning of
wretchedness. Stokes to be
trusted? “Who is that gentleman on horseback?” said she, as they
proceeded—speaking more to assist Mr. He then made his bow, and departed with the rest. Woodhouse; “and
always did. There she is—no, that’s somebody else. Ferrars’s,
their best compliments and service, and how sorry they was they had not
time to come on and see you, but they was in a great hurry to go
forwards, for they was going further down for a little while, but
howsever, when they come back, they’d make sure to come and see you.”

“But did she tell you she was married, Thomas?”

“Yes, ma’am. “Indeed!” replied Lucy; “I wonder at that, for I thought you must have
seen her at Norland sometimes. Tell him what a dreadful state I am in--that I am frightened
out of my wits; and have such tremblings, such flutterings all over me,
such spasms in my side, and pains in my head, and such beatings at my
heart, that I can get no rest by night nor by day. Stokes,’ said
I—but I had not time for more.” She was now met by Mrs. Jennings laughed again, but Elinor had not spirits to say more,
and eager at all events to know what Willoughby had written, hurried
away to their room, where, on opening the door, she saw Marianne
stretched on the bed, almost choked by grief, one letter in her hand,
and two or three others lying by her. Would not Mr. In short, I have made a match between Mr. After abusing you so
abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all
your relations.”

“What did you say of me that I did not deserve? The Eltons walked together; Mr. “Oh, yes! Cole
never touches malt liquor. Woodhouse would never believe it. “Lizzy, you must not do so. I may not have
convinced you perhaps, but I am perfectly convinced myself that Mr. I have nothing to say against
_him_: he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he
ought to have, I should think you could not do better. Jennings, had leisure
enough for thinking over the past. They
entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through
a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent. The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast
approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter
arrived from Mrs. where is your sash, my dear?”

But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down
without one of her sisters. Only let me
be told when I may speak out.—I wonder whether Jane has any suspicion.”

He went to Highbury the next morning, and satisfied himself on that
point. But how shall I do? I was ready to die of laughter. It was some days, however, before they
received any invitation thither, for while there were visitors in the
house they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,
almost a week after the gentlemen’s arrival, that they were honoured by
such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
come there in the evening. Denny and Mr. I have no fears at all for myself; and I should have no
scruples of staying as late as Mrs. to be a second time the dupe
of her misconceptions and flattery. Knightley could not impute to Emma a more relenting heart
than she possessed, or a heart more disposed to accept of his. James’s?”

“Never, sir.”

“Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?”

“It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.”

“You have a house in town, I conclude?”

Mr. You are too obliging,
my dear Miss Woodhouse; but we really must take leave. It was only to ask
Elinor to marry him;—and considering that he was not altogether
inexperienced in such a question, it might be strange that he should
feel so uncomfortable in the present case as he really did, so much in
need of encouragement and fresh air. Knightley gave Emma considerable
pleasure. I declare
sometimes I do not know which way to look before them.”

She had wandered away to a subject on which Elinor had nothing to say,
and therefore soon judged it expedient to find her way back again to
the first. no, nothing should
tempt me to leave her. Two thousand a year without
debt or drawback—except the little love-child, indeed; aye, I had
forgot her; but she may be ’prenticed out at a small cost, and then
what does it signify? Knightley, she is really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor, and I am
sure she _will_ miss her more than she thinks for.”

Emma turned away her head, divided between tears and smiles. Weston to Mrs. He was not handsome, and his
manners required intimacy to make them pleasing. He
does not draw himself, indeed, but he has great pleasure in seeing the
performances of other people, and I assure you he is by no means
deficient in natural taste, though he has not had opportunities of
improving it. He did not speak, he did not behave like himself. But I am determined to set for it the very first
opportunity.”

“You are quite in the right,” replied Elinor calmly. All within Elinor’s breast was satisfaction, silent and strong. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to
her, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you are come, for there is such
fun here! No
look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Davies was coming to town, and so we thought we’d join
him in a post-chaise; and he behaved very genteelly, and paid ten or
twelve shillings more than we did.”

“Oh, oh!” cried Mrs. His wife gave him a look which invited
him in; and, while he was coming round, added, “Now, dearest Emma, let
me intreat you to say and look every thing that may set his heart at
ease, and incline him to be satisfied with the match. I felt that, as to fortune, in all probability he might do much better;
and that as to a rational companion or useful helpmate, he could not do
worse. Her spirits seemed overcome. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to
outstrip them. Like him! Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon’s being expected at the
Cottage, as he really wished not only to be better acquainted with him,
but to have an opportunity of convincing him that he no longer resented
his giving him the living of Delaford—“Which, at present,” said he,
“after thanks so ungraciously delivered as mine were on the occasion,
he must think I have never forgiven him for offering.”

_Now_ he felt astonished himself that he had never yet been to the
place. Darcy is particularly fond
of, that I may have it to-morrow.”

This was a sad omen of what her mother’s behaviour to the gentleman
himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain
possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations’
consent, there was still something to be wished for. Miss Fairfax must already have given her account.—I
shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow.”

“Upon my word! Bates, the widow of a former vicar of Highbury, was a very old
lady, almost past every thing but tea and quadrille. They seem to satisfy every body else.”

“I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs. This was one
of her expressions. He has been accused of many faults at different times;
     but _this_ is the true one. The assistance he thought of, I dare say, was only such as might
be reasonably expected of you; for instance, such as looking out for a
comfortable small house for them, helping them to move their things,
and sending them presents of fish and game, and so forth, whenever they
are in season. Dashwood. Collins to join his daughters in their
walk; and Mr. How came they acquainted?” She wished very
much to have the subject continued, though she did not chuse to join in
it herself; but nothing more of it was said, and for the first time in
her life, she thought Mrs. In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your
feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn
estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. but from what the report of
their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine;
till she recollected that _his_ being the intimate friend of Bingley,
and _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the
expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply
the idea. There can be no love in all this. Bingley. I, who am owing
all my happiness to _you_, would not it be horrible ingratitude in me
to be severe on them?”

Emma laughed, and replied: “But I had the assistance of all your
endeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people. Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being
introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party. Mr. Weston, whose happiness it was to be hoped might
eventually be as much increased by the arrival of a child, as that of
all her neighbours was by the approach of it. I see her
instrument is open.”

“She is walking, I believe.”

They were now joined by Mrs. Mrs. Could you have a motive for
the trust, that was not honourable and flattering to me?”

“And yet I do assure you,” replied Lucy, her little sharp eyes full of
meaning, “there seemed to me to be a coldness and displeasure in your
manner that made me quite uncomfortable. it gives one exactly the idea of
such a height as Miss Smith’s. Knightley had a cheerful manner, which
always did him good; and his many inquiries after “poor Isabella” and
her children were answered most satisfactorily. But her promise of relating it
to her sister was invariably painful. Mr. I wish him very happy; and I am so sure of his
always doing his duty, that though now he may harbour some regret, in
the end he must become so. Good Heavens!—What can be to be
_broke_ to me, that does not relate to one of that family?”

“Upon my honour,” said he very seriously, “it does not. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked
her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends. I shall not be far off, if you want me.”—And Emma distinctly
heard him add, in a lower tone, before he quitted the room,—“I have
been as good as my word. Jennings had been anxious to see Colonel Brandon well married, ever
since her connection with Sir John first brought him to her knowledge;
and she was always anxious to get a good husband for every pretty girl. Beyond it she would on no account
proceed. _I_ think seriously of Miss Smith!—Miss Smith is a very good sort of
girl; and I should be happy to see her respectably settled. Frank Churchill placed a word before Miss Fairfax. Day! He had found her agitated and low.—Frank Churchill was a villain.— He
heard her declare that she had never loved him. Yes, _I_
have one other comfort in his picture, but poor Edward has not even
_that_. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their
mother talked on of her dislike of Mr. Miss Bingley did the same;
and Mrs. That young man (speaking lower) is very
thoughtless. */

“Dear Sir,

     “The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured
     father always gave me much uneasiness; and, since I have had the
     misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the
     breach: but, for some time, I was kept back by my own doubts,
     fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be
     on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased him to be
     at variance.”--‘There, Mrs. Weston, you must really have had Aladdin’s
lamp. Palmer soon
after she arrived, carried Mrs. Darcy would bring his sister to visit
her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was, consequently,
resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning. Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in the
commission of the peace for the county, she was a most active magistrate
in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by
Mr. I should be sorry to be more.”

Upon the whole, she was equally contented with her view of his
feelings. Smith; and on this head I shall be no more disposed to
question your judgment than to doubt your inclination.”

“My engagements at present,” replied Willoughby, confusedly, “are of
such a nature—that—I dare not flatter myself—”

He stopped. Woodhouse, rather warmly, “you are very much mistaken
if you suppose Mr. The result of his thoughts appeared at last in these words. It would be a
_secret_ satisfaction; but the consciousness of a similarity of
prospect would certainly add to the interest with which she should
attend to any thing Jane might communicate. But I was
really quite shocked the other day—for Mr. The service he rendered you
was enough to warm your heart.”

“Service! He thinks Marianne’s affection too deeply rooted for any change in
it under a great length of time, and even supposing her heart again
free, is too diffident of himself to believe, that with such a
difference of age and disposition he could ever attach her. You must promise me not to sit
up.”

He did, on the condition of some promises on her side: such as that, if
she came home cold, she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly; if
hungry, that she would take something to eat; that her own maid should
sit up for her; and that Serle and the butler should see that every
thing were safe in the house, as usual. Dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour, and so
earnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law for it, that, on the
arrival of the latter, she would have quitted the house for ever, had
not the entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on the
propriety of going, and her own tender love for all her three children
determined her afterwards to stay, and for their sakes avoid a breach
with their brother. Jennings’s
heart, she is not a woman whose society can afford us pleasure, or
whose protection will give us consequence.”

“That is very true,” replied her mother, “but of her society,
separately from that of other people, you will scarcely have any thing
at all, and you will almost always appear in public with Lady
Middleton.”

“If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of Mrs. Not a speck on them.”

“Well! One day’s delay, she observed,
would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite
so obstinate as usual. “Mr. But, perhaps, his sister does as well
for the present; and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he
likes with her.”

“No,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam, “that is an advantage which he must
divide with me. The young man had been the first admirer,
but she trusted there was no other hold, and that there would be no
serious difficulty, on Harriet’s side, to oppose any friendly
arrangement of her own. Mr. Cole of
the rise and progress of the affair was so glorious—the steps so quick,
from the accidental rencontre, to the dinner at Mr. I desire you will stay where you are.” And
upon Elizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about
to escape, she added, “Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing
Mr. no, there is but one. Mr. Do not imagine me ignorant of their
condition.”

“Whatever my connections may be,” said Elizabeth, “if your nephew does
not object to them, they can be nothing to _you_.”

“Tell me, once for all, are you engaged to him?”

Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady
Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a
moment’s deliberation,--

“I am not.”

Lady Catherine seemed pleased. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea
of two young women travelling post by themselves. _My_
affections and wishes are unchanged; but one word from you will silence
me on this subject for ever.”

Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of
his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not
very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had undergone
so material a change since the period to which he alluded, as to make
her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances. She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of
bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away
without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation,
than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. He was welcomed by them all with great cordiality, but especially by
Marianne, who showed more warmth of regard in her reception of him than
even Elinor herself. They are destined for each other by the voice of
every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide
them?--the upstart pretensions of a young woman without family,
connections, or fortune! The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must
guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its
continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and
disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that
establishment were gained. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate,
but did not live to do it. “Yes, a little—not much.”

After a short pause. “Oh,” said she, “I heard you before; but I could not immediately
determine what to say in reply. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as
his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having
no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the
moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the
observances which he supposed a regular part of the business. But you would not wish to be dancing while she is ill?”

Lydia declared herself satisfied. But, perhaps,” added he, stopping in his
walk, and turning towards her, “these offences might have been
overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the
scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine
there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did
not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man
on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride
of one who had ten thousand a year. Colonel Brandon
is certainly younger than Mrs. Well, I was so
frightened I did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away;
and if we were beyond the hour we could not be married all day. I really never could think well of
any body who proposed such a thing to any body else.”

“Nobody ever did think well of the Churchills, I fancy,” observed Mr. Oh,
Lord! Very few days passed in which Mr. what an evening of agony it was! Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was
rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. This matter may be
considered, therefore, as finally settled.” And rising as she thus
spoke, she would have quitted the room, had not Mr. They must encounter each
other, and make the best of it. that is quite surprising, for we have had a vast deal of rain
here. Smith and myself—and I resolved therefore on calling at the
cottage, in my way to Honiton. She must not appear to think it a misfortune.—With all the spirits she
could command, she prepared him first for something strange, and then,
in a few words, said, that if his consent and approbation could be
obtained—which, she trusted, would be attended with no difficulty,
since it was a plan to promote the happiness of all—she and Mr. However, he
wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were.”

“And so ended his affection,” said Elizabeth, impatiently. They were to be off as soon as possible. Let us sit down. He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motive his cousin
could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other
way. We _will_ know where
we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen. “I did not know that you intended to walk,” said Miss Bingley, in some
confusion, lest they had been overheard. no, the meeting is certainly to-day,” was the abrupt answer, which
denoted the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs. Elton’s attentions to Jane was in the first style of guileless
simplicity and warmth. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation
with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth’s high diversion, was
stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness
before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss De Bourgh looked that
way. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady
and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. “I often feel concern,” said she, “that I dare not make our carriage
more useful on such occasions. Bennet?”

“Yes, or I will never see her again.”

“An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. She began immediately to
determine, that Edward who lived with his mother, must be asked as his
mother was, to a party given by his sister; and to see him for the
first time, after all that passed, in the company of Lucy!—she hardly
knew how she could bear it! Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way of acting to his
mother’s account; and it was happy for her that he had a mother whose
character was so imperfectly known to her, as to be the general excuse
for every thing strange on the part of her son. this must be the very shop that every body attends every day of
their lives, as my father informs me. Woodhouse’s habits and inclination being
consulted in every thing. I came to you without a
doubt of my reception. Tell me how Miss Fairfax is.”

And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hear
her in any thing else. “I am astonished, my dear,” said Mrs. Lucy is monstrous pretty,
and so good humoured and agreeable! If she has
fancied otherwise, her own wishes have misled her, and I am very
sorry—extremely sorry—But, Miss Smith, indeed!—Oh! Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but that
his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Weston; and the transition from Highbury to Enscombe, the contrast
between the places in some of the first blessings of social life was
just enough touched on to shew how keenly it was felt, and how much
more might have been said but for the restraints of propriety.—The
charm of her own name was not wanting. “I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much
for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. Bennet
say voluntarily to Elizabeth,----

“I am glad you are come back, Lizzy.”

Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases
came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects
which occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, across the
table, after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. She has borne it all, with the fortitude of an
angel! Of Edward, or at least of some of his concerns, she now received
intelligence from Colonel Brandon, who had been into Dorsetshire
lately; and who, treating her at once as the disinterested friend of
Mr. It was broken by Lucy, who renewed the subject again by
saying, with some hesitation,

“I cannot bear to have you think me impertinently curious. and Miss Bates
loved to be called on, and she knew she was considered by the very few
who presumed ever to see imperfection in her, as rather negligent in
that respect, and as not contributing what she ought to the stock of
their scanty comforts. Elizabeth
was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme;
and, had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him
would have been the last object of her wishes. Mrs. She thought it in reality a sad exchange for herself, to
have him with his grave looks and reluctant conversation opposed to her
instead of his brother. These
bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater
policy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of my
being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by
reflection, by everything. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. It was an alarming change; and Emma was thinking of it one
morning, as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve her,
when Mr. Emma, you are a great dreamer, I think?”

Emma was out of hearing. Elton’s rights, however, gradually revived. always my
kindest friend on every occasion. All I have ever attempted to influence has been the
behaviour. What a horrible idea! Mr. [Illustration]

Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what
she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorized to mention it,
when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter to
announce her engagement to the family. Bennet’s consent should be
asked in the course of the evening: Elizabeth reserved to herself the
application for her mother’s. Very pleasant
party. I have laid down my
plan, and if I am capable of adhering to it—my feelings shall be
governed and my temper improved. There was consciousness,
animation, and warmth; there was every thing which her countenance or
manner could ever have wanted.— She came forward with an offered hand;
and said, in a low, but very feeling tone,

“This is most kind, indeed!—Miss Woodhouse, it is impossible for me to
express—I hope you will believe—Excuse me for being so entirely without
words.”

Emma was gratified, and would soon have shewn no want of words, if the
sound of Mrs. I wonder what he can be doing there.”

“Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh,” said
Elizabeth. Enscombe however was gracious, gracious in fact, if not in word. Will you allow
me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance
during your stay at Lambton?”

The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great
for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. Goddard’s
unavoidable absences, and raise her spirits by representing how much
Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet
were not decidedly better. yes—but how they were conveyed hither?—the manner of their
coming?”

“They walked, I conclude. It was no longer in Emma’s power
to superintend his happiness or quicken his measures. I remember her promising to give you some. Cole’s, or balls
at the Crown. He will be there in February, otherwise
London would have no charms for me; I have not spirits for it.”

Elinor was soon called to the card-table by the conclusion of the first
rubber, and the confidential discourse of the two ladies was therefore
at an end, to which both of them submitted without any reluctance, for
nothing had been said on either side to make them dislike each other
less than they had done before; and Elinor sat down to the card table
with the melancholy persuasion that Edward was not only without
affection for the person who was to be his wife; but that he had not
even the chance of being tolerably happy in marriage, which sincere
affection on _her_ side would have given, for self-interest alone could
induce a woman to keep a man to an engagement, of which she seemed so
thoroughly aware that he was weary. Mrs. “You do not go to town on horseback, do you?” added Sir John. What has it been but a system of
hypocrisy and deceit,—espionage, and treachery?—To come among us with
professions of openness and simplicity; and such a league in secret to
judge us all!—Here have we been, the whole winter and spring,
completely duped, fancying ourselves all on an equal footing of truth
and honour, with two people in the midst of us who may have been
carrying round, comparing and sitting in judgment on sentiments and
words that were never meant for both to hear.—They must take the
consequence, if they have heard each other spoken of in a way not
perfectly agreeable!”

“I am quite easy on that head,” replied Mrs. “She is a great deal too ill to be
moved. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you
must confess. Lydia was
Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. Palmer. Philips was very
thankful for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason. There was a kind
of cold hearted selfishness on both sides, which mutually attracted
them; and they sympathised with each other in an insipid propriety of
demeanor, and a general want of understanding. “It was greatly my wish that he should do so,” he added, “as soon as his
marriage was fixed on. Be satisfied with doctoring and coddling yourself and
the children, and let me look as I chuse.”

“I did not thoroughly understand what you were telling your brother,”
cried Emma, “about your friend Mr. “Read it, read it,” said he, “it will give you pleasure; only a few
lines—will not take you long; read it to Emma.”

The two ladies looked over it together; and he sat smiling and talking
to them the whole time, in a voice a little subdued, but very audible
to every body. John Knightley must be in town again on the 28th, and we
ought to be thankful, papa, that we are to have the whole of the time
they can give to the country, that two or three days are not to be
taken out for the Abbey. Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy’s marriage; but as she
thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she
dropped all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as
attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility
to Elizabeth. They were engaged about the end of that time to
attend Lady Middleton to a party, from which Mrs. She
would not have been puzzled, had she dared fix on them. I have good reason to think—indeed I have it
from the best authority, or I should not repeat it, for otherwise it
would be very wrong to say any thing about it,—but I have it from the
very best authority,—not that I ever precisely heard Mrs. Knightley,) who know how very, very seldom I am ever two hours
from Hartfield, why you should foresee such a series of dissipation for
me, I cannot imagine. he could ride to London at any time. With apprehensive caution therefore it was
revealed, and he was listened to with unexpected calmness. As to the pretence of
trying her native air, I look upon that as a mere excuse.—In the summer
it might have passed; but what can any body’s native air do for them in
the months of January, February, and March? No sacrifice on any side worth the
name. Jennings one morning for half an
hour. ‘This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with everything the
heart of mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and
extensive patronage. They were of course all intending to be surprised: but their
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs. No
doubt it had been from jealousy.—In Jane’s eyes she had been a rival;
and well might any thing she could offer of assistance or regard be
repulsed. I will endeavour to banish every painful
     thought, and think only of what will make me happy, your affection,
     and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. It was
impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its
owner. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect
of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away where either were
concerned. Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.”

“Care of him! I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.”

Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his
countenance. Knightley, as
to think he deserved even her dearest Emma; and it was in every respect
so proper, suitable, and unexceptionable a connexion, and in one
respect, one point of the highest importance, so peculiarly eligible,
so singularly fortunate, that now it seemed as if Emma could not safely
have attached herself to any other creature, and that she had herself
been the stupidest of beings in not having thought of it, and wished it
long ago.—How very few of those men in a rank of life to address Emma
would have renounced their own home for Hartfield! one never thinks of married men’s being beaux—they have
something else to do.”

“Lord! Emma
called on her the next day, and found her doom already signed with
regard to Randalls. The
truth is, Harriet, that my playing is just good enough to be praised,
but Jane Fairfax’s is much beyond it.”

“Well, I always shall think that you play quite as well as she does, or
that if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out. If there is no
other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not be
kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry
Miss de Bourgh. The first remote sound to which she felt herself obliged to
attend, was the name of Jane Fairfax. Poor Marianne, languid and low from the nature of her malady, and
feeling herself universally ill, could no longer hope that tomorrow
would find her recovered; and the idea of what tomorrow would have
produced, but for this unlucky illness, made every ailment severe; for
on that day they were to have begun their journey home; and, attended
the whole way by a servant of Mrs. He _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, but his
countenance expressed real security. Have you thought, my dear, where you shall put her—and what
room there will be for the children?”

“Oh! This is like giving ourselves a
slap, to be sure! It was not so yesterday, I think. Darcy is not to be laughed at!” cried Elizabeth. There will be but one subject throughout the
parishes of Donwell and Highbury; but one interest—one object of
curiosity; it will be all Mr. That _she_ could
be in any danger from the deception never entered my head. for shame!” He heard Frank
Churchill next say, with a glance towards Jane, “I will give it to
her—shall I?”—and as clearly heard Emma opposing it with eager laughing
warmth. John Knightley, that
in spite of maternal solicitude for the immediate enjoyment of her
little ones, and for their having instantly all the liberty and
attendance, all the eating and drinking, and sleeping and playing,
which they could possibly wish for, without the smallest delay, the
children were never allowed to be long a disturbance to him, either in
themselves or in any restless attendance on them. You want your neighbours’
opinions. Elizabeth was delighted. We were just in time; my mother just ready
for us. He turned to Mrs. But vanity, not love, has been my
folly. Weston
doat upon her.”

But his spirits were soon rising again, and with laughing eyes, after
mentioning the expected return of the Campbells, he named the name of
Dixon.—Emma blushed, and forbade its being pronounced in her hearing. “Aye, very true, my dear,” cried the latter, though Jane had not spoken
a word—“I was just going to say the same thing. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Weston, like a sweet-tempered woman
and a good wife, had examined the passage again, and found the evils of
it much less than she had supposed before—indeed very trifling; and
here ended the difficulties of decision. “’Twill be a fine thing to have her married so young to be sure,” said
she, “and I hear he is quite a beau, and prodigious handsome. Darcy’s civility, and, above
all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister. She
soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding
to the efforts of his aunt, who _did_ call on him in her return through
London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the
substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on
every expression of the latter, which, in her Ladyship’s apprehension,
peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance, in the belief that
such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise from
her nephew which _she_ had refused to give. I must tell you what an unlucky thing happened to
me, as to that. Ferrars, her curiosity to know what she was like, was
as lively as ever. They had been walking about the
place with some of their new friends, and were just returned to the inn
to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a
carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and lady in a
curricle driving up the street. I know that you could be neither happy nor
respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband, unless you looked
up to him as a superior. why did she come? Oh, sister! Elton
would have been too great a distinction.—She never could have deserved
him—and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as Miss Woodhouse would
have thought it possible. However, I
shan’t say anything against them to _you;_ and to be sure they did send
us home in their own chariot, which was more than I looked for. Weston,” said she, “we are detaining the
girls.”

“Well, well, I am ready;”—and turning again to Emma, “but you must not
be expecting such a _very_ fine young man; you have only had _my_
account you know; I dare say he is really nothing
extraordinary:”—though his own sparkling eyes at the moment were
speaking a very different conviction. He was the son of Mr. She
would have been ashamed to look her family in the face the next
morning, had she not risen from her bed in more need of repose than
when she lay down in it. It was all
     over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked
     as _yours_ seems to have been. ‘My motive for
cautioning you is as follows:--We have reason to imagine that his aunt,
Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly
eye.’ _Mr. _That_ was due to the folly of Robert,
and the cunning of his wife; and it was earned by them before many
months had passed away. “A man of whom he had
always had such reason to think well! She could
not foresee that Colonel Brandon would give me a living.”

“No; but she might suppose that something would occur in your favour;
that your own family might in time relent. CHAPTER II. Weston better in my
life—never looking so well. With regard to herself,
it was now a matter of unconcern whether she went to town or not, and
when she saw her mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan, and her
sister exhilarated by it in look, voice, and manner, restored to all
her usual animation, and elevated to more than her usual gaiety, she
could not be dissatisfied with the cause, and would hardly allow
herself to distrust the consequence. “Good God!” cried Marianne, “he has been here while we were out.”
Elinor, rejoiced to be assured of his being in London, now ventured to
say, “Depend upon it, he will call again tomorrow.” But Marianne seemed
hardly to hear her, and on Mrs. Things did not
seem—that is, there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits of some.—So
it appeared to me at least, but I might be mistaken. But it
was a hope shortly checked by other considerations; and she soon felt
that even her vanity was insufficient, when required to depend on his
affection for her, for a woman who had already refused him, as able to
overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with
Wickham. You have delighted us long enough. It was accepted; and
from that period Jane had belonged to Colonel Campbell’s family, and
had lived with them entirely, only visiting her grandmother from time
to time. But, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough, when perceived
by his sister, to make her uneasy, and at the same time, (which was
still more common,) to make her uncivil. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. And as I come back, I can call on
Lady Lucas and Mrs. And last night he was with us so happy, so cheerful, so
affectionate? And you may be certain that when I have the honour of
seeing her again I shall speak in the highest terms of your modesty,
economy, and other amiable qualifications.”

“Indeed, Mr. _That_ belonged rather to the hearer, for Marianne
listened with horror, and cried excessively. Reynolds, either
from pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her
master and his sister. Darcy is
so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in
Meryton, to attempt to place him in an amiable light. Dixon is a principal in the business.”

“Indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced. ’Tis as good as a lord! “No, I do not think we shall.”

“Oh, yes, I dare say you will.”

Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition. Bennet’s visit, and sat about ten
minutes with him in his library. He had a great
regard for Mrs. Have you any thing to send or say,
besides the ‘love,’ which nobody carries?”

“Nothing at all. It is not likely you should ever have observed
him; but he knows you very well indeed—I mean by sight.”

“I have no doubt of his being a very respectable young man. I have great hopes of finding him quite the
reverse. Emma was extremely glad to see
him—but there was a degree of confusion—a number of embarrassing
recollections on each side. Frank Churchill’s
character was not desperate.—She was his own Emma, by hand and word,
when they returned into the house; and if he could have thought of
Frank Churchill then, he might have deemed him a very good sort of
fellow. Our first care has
been to keep the matter secret. But I only go for
the sake of seeing Edward. who
can think of Miss Smith, when Miss Woodhouse is near! This charade!—If I had studied a twelvemonth, I could never have
made any thing like it.”

“I thought he meant to try his skill, by his manner of declining it
yesterday.”

“I do think it is, without exception, the best charade I ever read.”

“I never read one more to the purpose, certainly.”

“It is as long again as almost all we have had before.”

“I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour. I shall see how
much I am before-hand with the world in the spring, and we will plan
our improvements accordingly.”

In the mean time, till all these alterations could be made from the
savings of an income of five hundred a-year by a woman who never saved
in her life, they were wise enough to be contented with the house as it
was; and each of them was busy in arranging their particular concerns,
and endeavoring, by placing around them books and other possessions, to
form themselves a home. I assure you it was a great compliment if he was, for he hardly
ever falls in love with any body.”

“Is Mr. Elizabeth will
     soon be the wife of Mr. Emma was very compassionate; and the distresses of the poor
were as sure of relief from her personal attention and kindness, her
counsel and her patience, as from her purse. He said no more. It was a bad business. “This sensation of listlessness,
weariness, stupidity, this disinclination to sit down and employ
myself, this feeling of every thing’s being dull and insipid about the
house!— I must be in love; I should be the oddest creature in the world
if I were not—for a few weeks at least. They met again on Sunday, and then _I_ saw him too. It cannot last long. “And is this all?” cried Elizabeth. As
soon as Jane had read Mr. Cole told Mrs. Dashwood
immediately took all that trouble on herself; and Elinor had the
benefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it. She was too completely
overpowered to be immediately able to reply: and two moments of silence
being ample encouragement for Mr. Half a dozen natural
children, perhaps—and poor Frank cut off!—This, though very
undesirable, would be no matter of agony to her. When people come into a beautiful country of this sort, you
know, Miss Woodhouse, one naturally wishes them to see as much as
possible; and Mr. All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months
before, had been almost an angel of light. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of the
family; but he was affected by a recommendation of such a nature at
such a time, and he promised to do every thing in his power to make
them comfortable. I can only pronounce him to be a sensible man, well-bred,
well-informed, of gentle address, and, I believe, possessing an amiable
heart.”

“Miss Dashwood,” cried Willoughby, “you are now using me unkindly. Presently the
carriage stopt; she looked up; it was stopt by Mr. Miss Harriet Smith may not find offers of marriage flow in so
fast, though she is a very pretty girl. I have another person’s interest at
present so much at heart, that I cannot think any longer about Frank
Churchill. Darcy, and Mr. Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely
more.” Then addressing her daughter, “Oh, my dear, dear Jane, I am so
happy! You refuse to obey the
claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. For the comfort of her children, had she consulted only her
own wishes, she would have kept it; but the discretion of Elinor
prevailed. Weston had
agreed to chuse some fine morning and drive thither. no doubt she had been suffering a great deal:
more than any body had ever supposed—and continual pain would try the
temper. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that
it would happen. When does she try to
avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it?”




CHAPTER IX. The
distinction had, perhaps, been felt too strongly. You will be setting your cap at him now, and never think of poor
Brandon.”

“That is an expression, Sir John,” said Marianne, warmly, “which I
particularly dislike. Willoughby got up two hours before his usual
time, on purpose to go to Whitwell.”

Colonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at being the cause of
disappointing the party; but at the same time declared it to be
unavoidable. However, I do really think Mr. Why was he to be the
judge?”

“You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?”

“I do not see what right Mr. Mr. Gardiner,
looking at the picture; “it is a handsome face. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend, and their
correspondence was as regular and frequent as it ever had been: that it
should be equally unreserved was impossible. “And what,” said Mrs. Its effect was most extraordinary;
for, on first hearing it, Mrs. Elton had learned from the ostler on the subject, being the
accumulation of the ostler’s own knowledge, and the knowledge of the
servants at Randalls, was, that a messenger had come over from Richmond
soon after the return of the party from Box Hill—which messenger,
however, had been no more than was expected; and that Mr. Pratt’s, all this would have been prevented.’ This
is the way in which I always consider the matter, and my mother is
perfectly convinced of her error.”

Elinor would not oppose his opinion, because, whatever might be her
general estimation of the advantage of a public school, she could not
think of Edward’s abode in Mr. The most satisfactory
comparisons were rising in her mind. Nothing of the sort had ever
occurred before to any young ladies in the place, within her memory; no
rencontre, no alarm of the kind;—and now it had happened to the very
person, and at the very hour, when the other very person was chancing
to pass by to rescue her!—It certainly was very extraordinary!—And
knowing, as she did, the favourable state of mind of each at this
period, it struck her the more. Weston, if you will dance with me.”

“Me!—oh! my dear child, do you accuse Willoughby and
Marianne of concealment? Lady Middleton was not more than six or
seven and twenty; her face was handsome, her figure tall and striking,
and her address graceful. It is evident that you belong to the
first circles. When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her,
and made the important communication. Will you be very angry with me, my dear
     Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold
     enough to say before) how much I like him? Because he believes many people pretend
to more admiration of the beauties of nature than they really feel, and
is disgusted with such pretensions, he affects greater indifference and
less discrimination in viewing them himself than he possesses. Mrs. “It is my duty, and I am sure it is my wish,” she continued, “to have
no reserves with you on this subject. May I hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dances
of this little projected ball, to be given, not at Randalls, but at the
Crown Inn?”

“The Crown!”

“Yes; if you and Mr. Elton, “but I must confess
that I regard it as a most happy thought, the placing of Miss Smith out
of doors; and the tree is touched with such inimitable spirit! Dashwood and her daughters were met at the door of the house by
Sir John, who welcomed them to Barton Park with unaffected sincerity;
and as he attended them to the drawing room repeated to the young
ladies the concern which the same subject had drawn from him the day
before, at being unable to get any smart young men to meet them. Well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as I can. Mrs. As to any thing superior for you, I suppose she
is quite in the dark. Your musical knowledge alone would entitle you to name
your own terms, have as many rooms as you like, and mix in the family
as much as you chose;—that is—I do not know—if you knew the harp, you
might do all that, I am very sure; but you sing as well as play;—yes, I
really believe you might, even without the harp, stipulate for what you
chose;—and you must and shall be delightfully, honourably and
comfortably settled before the Campbells or I have any rest.”

“You may well class the delight, the honour, and the comfort of such a
situation together,” said Jane, “they are pretty sure to be equal;
however, I am very serious in not wishing any thing to be attempted at
present for me. You never see a fault in anybody. Such a companion for herself in
the periods of anxiety and cheerlessness before her!—Such a partner in
all those duties and cares to which time must be giving increase of
melancholy! Charlotte had seen them from her
husband’s room, crossing the road, and immediately running into the
other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding,--

“I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare. Bates, &c.,” and they did at
last move out of the shop, with no farther delay from Miss Bates than,

“How do you do, Mrs. They met Mr. I am sure it was
a source of high entertainment to you, to feel that you were taking us
all in.—Perhaps I am the readier to suspect, because, to tell you the
truth, I think it might have been some amusement to myself in the same
situation. A young _woman_, if she fall
into bad hands, may be teased, and kept at a distance from those she
wants to be with; but one cannot comprehend a young _man_’s being under
such restraint, as not to be able to spend a week with his father, if
he likes it.”

“One ought to be at Enscombe, and know the ways of the family, before
one decides upon what he can do,” replied Mrs. Elton, a young man living alone without liking it, the privilege
of exchanging any vacant evening of his own blank solitude for the
elegancies and society of Mr. She felt that she had no business at
Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. The hasty engagement she had
entered into with that woman—Here, my dear madam, I was obliged to
leave off abruptly, to recollect and compose myself.—I have been
walking over the country, and am now, I hope, rational enough to make
the rest of my letter what it ought to be.—It is, in fact, a most
mortifying retrospect for me. “As soon as ever Mr. He has no occasion to marry, either to fill up
his time or his heart.”

“My dear Emma, as long as he thinks so, it is so; but if he really
loves Jane Fairfax—”

“Nonsense! I longed to know whether
he would be married in his blue coat. Bingley is coming down, sister,” (for Mrs. Miss Bennet accepted her aunt’s invitation with pleasure; and the
Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time than as she
hoped, by Caroline’s not living in the same house with her brother, she
might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of
seeing him. Willoughby had no property of his own in the
country; that he resided there only while he was visiting the old lady
at Allenham Court, to whom he was related, and whose possessions he was
to inherit; adding, “Yes, yes, he is very well worth catching I can
tell you, Miss Dashwood; he has a pretty little estate of his own in
Somersetshire besides; and if I were you, I would not give him up to my
younger sister, in spite of all this tumbling down hills. Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs. We are each of an unsocial,
taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say
something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
posterity with all the _éclat_ of a proverb.”

“This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,”
said he. Jones’s being sent for
immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could
be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most
eminent physicians. Of all the sources of evil
surrounding the former, since her coming to Highbury, she was persuaded
that she must herself have been the worst. It will be in my power to
assure him that her Ladyship was quite well yesterday se’nnight.”

Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme; assuring him
that Mr. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth,
and nothing at all to the others. Excuse me, Miss Dashwood. No other visitor appeared that evening, and the ladies were
unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed. The dejection was almost
universal. He came back
gay and self-satisfied, eager and busy, caring nothing for Miss
Woodhouse, and defying Miss Smith. I do not at
     all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me; but,
     if the same circumstances were to happen again, I am sure I should
     be deceived again. I can allow for
the fears of the child, but not of the man. Jennings’s kindness, though its
effusions were often distressing, and sometimes almost ridiculous, made
her those acknowledgments, and returned her those civilities, which her
sister could not make or return for herself. What shall we do with him? Bingley. Where a man does his best with only moderate powers, he
will have the advantage over negligent superiority. “If he wants our society, let
him seek it. Marianne, not contented with
absolutely refusing to go herself, was very urgent to prevent her
sister’s going at all; and Mrs. I hope he will be calling soon. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing
_you_ unable to respect your partner in life. She saw
only that he was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it. Certainly she had often, especially of late, thought his manners to
herself unnecessarily gallant; but it had passed as his way, as a mere
error of judgment, of knowledge, of taste, as one proof among others
that he had not always lived in the best society, that with all the
gentleness of his address, true elegance was sometimes wanting; but,
till this very day, she had never, for an instant, suspected it to mean
any thing but grateful respect to her as Harriet’s friend. What shall we play at? He should like to see the old house
again exceedingly, and should be very happy to meet Mr. He bestowed his hearty approbation however on their
species of house. She could
undertake therefore to inform him of it, in the course of the day. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising
every hour in his esteem. Her
imagination was busy, her reflections were pleasant, and the pain of a
sprained ankle was disregarded. Another view of man, my second brings;
    Behold him there, the monarch of the seas! They will be extremely
glad to see you, I am sure; and one of my servants shall go with you to
shew you the way.”

“My dear sir, upon no account in the world; my father can direct me.”

“But your father is not going so far; he is only going to the Crown,
quite on the other side of the street, and there are a great many
houses; you might be very much at a loss, and it is a very dirty walk,
unless you keep on the footpath; but my coachman can tell you where you
had best cross the street.”

Mr. I hate such false
friends. What can it possibly be? It makes one detest all one’s acquaintance. my dear, you are very modest. Goddard, and the teachers, and the girls and the affairs of the
school in general, formed naturally a great part of the
conversation—and but for her acquaintance with the Martins of
Abbey-Mill Farm, it must have been the whole. Every friend of Miss Taylor
must be glad to have her so happily married.”

“And you have forgotten one matter of joy to me,” said Emma, “and a
very considerable one—that I made the match myself. Churchill do without her? of all his sister’s falsehood and contrivance! “I can never think of it,” she cried, “without extreme shame.”

“The shame,” he answered, “is all mine, or ought to be. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand
your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I
demand it of your justice. There she sat—and who would have guessed how many tears she
had been lately shedding? I think her the
very worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have. She had known, it seems, of their
being in love with each other many weeks.”

“But not before they went to Brighton?”

“No, I believe not.”

“And did Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wickham himself? The attentions of a certain person can hardly be
among the tittle-tattle of Highbury yet. It would grieve me indeed to
be obliged to think ill of you; but if I am to do it, if I am to learn
that you are not what we have hitherto believed you, that your regard
for us all was insincere, that your behaviour to me was intended only
to deceive, let it be told as soon as possible. Mr. Philips’s vulgarity was another, and, perhaps, a greater tax on his
forbearance; and though Mrs. I have been told that you were asked to be of the
party. Weston’s quick amendment; and so ended a most satisfactory meeting. Lucy
first put an end to it by saying in a lower tone, though Marianne was
then giving them the powerful protection of a very magnificent
concerto,—

“I will honestly tell you of one scheme which has lately come into my
head, for bringing matters to bear; indeed I am bound to let you into
the secret, for you are a party concerned. Edward’s embarrassment lasted some time, and it ended in an absence of
mind still more settled. Unfeeling, selfish girl! If _I_ can
perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton indeed not to
discover it too.”

“Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane’s disposition as you do.”

“But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavor to conceal
it, he must find it out.”

“Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. They then talked on for
a few minutes longer without her catching a syllable, when another
lucky stop in Marianne’s performance brought her these words in the
Colonel’s calm voice,—

“I am afraid it cannot take place very soon.”

Astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech, she was almost
ready to cry out, “Lord! A small part of Derbyshire is all the present
concern. Your inexperience really amuses me! Ah! If you
can think me capable of ever feeling, surely you may suppose that I
have suffered _now_. And
how suffer him to leave her without saying one word of gratitude, of
concurrence, of common kindness! Elinor’s marriage divided her as little from her family as could well
be contrived, without rendering the cottage at Barton entirely useless,
for her mother and sisters spent much more than half their time with
her. “Business, you know, may bring money, but friendship hardly ever does.”

“Ah! How have I delighted, as I walked, to see them driven
in showers about me by the wind! Harriet listened, and Emma drew in peace. Jennings’s persuasion of his attachment, and would have
been enough, perhaps, had not Elinor still, as from the first, believed
Marianne his real favourite, to make her suspect it herself. Am I,—be it
only one degree,—am I less guilty in your opinion than I was before? She rushed to the
drawing-room,—she entered it,—and saw only Willoughby. His marriage must still be a distant good; at
least, I am afraid it cannot take place very soon.”

Such was the sentence which, when misunderstood, so justly offended the
delicate feelings of Mrs. Other books were produced, and after some deliberation he
chose “Fordyce’s Sermons.” Lydia gaped as he opened the volume; and
before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she
interrupted him with,--

“Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Philips talks of turning away
Richard? You
do us a great deal of honour to-day, I am sure. Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him, denoting her
intention of waiting on Mrs. Wickham, who left the place immediately,
and Mrs. We cannot suppose he would
help it, if he could. To
this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. What say you to Mr. Thus a circumstance occurred, while the sisters were together
in their own room after breakfast, which sunk the heart of Mrs. He promised to call again in the course of three or four
hours, and left both the patient and her anxious attendant more
composed than he had found them. Weston was often thinking about. Mrs. Elton’s return,
as to allow them all to meet again in the common routine of
acquaintance, without any danger of betraying sentiments or increasing
them. Berkeley Street, January. Elton, which nobody else pays her.”

Emma felt that Mrs. We shall be most happy to consider you as one of the
party.”

The same civilities and courtesies, the same success and satisfaction,
took place on the morrow, and accompanied the whole progress of the
picture, which was rapid and happy. It will be a very fine object from many parts
of the park, and the flower-garden will slope down just before it, and
be exceedingly pretty. Knightley. Elton himself appeared, she had
been much occupied by it, continually pondering over what could be done
in return, and wishing to do more than she dared to confess. The
sight of you, Edward, is the only comfort it has afforded; and thank
Heaven! You have done
all this! evil to some is always
good to others. She
wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing
which she could not praise. Weston, “is, that
Mrs. She did not wish to speak of the pianoforte, she felt too much in the
secret herself, to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair,
and therefore purposely kept at a distance; but by the others, the
subject was almost immediately introduced, and she saw the blush of
consciousness with which congratulations were received, the blush of
guilt which accompanied the name of “my excellent friend Colonel
Campbell.”

Mrs. When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth
had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon
found that Jane had no intelligence to give. And he is a very clever boy, indeed. Waiving that point,
however, and supposing her to be, as you describe her, only pretty and
good-natured, let me tell you, that in the degree she possesses them,
they are not trivial recommendations to the world in general, for she
is, in fact, a beautiful girl, and must be thought so by ninety-nine
people out of an hundred; and till it appears that men are much more
philosophic on the subject of beauty than they are generally supposed;
till they do fall in love with well-informed minds instead of handsome
faces, a girl, with such loveliness as Harriet, has a certainty of
being admired and sought after, of having the power of chusing from
among many, consequently a claim to be nice. [Illustration:

     “Unable to utter a syllable”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER LIX. One cannot have too large a party. sir—but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behind a
window-curtain, and throw up a sash, without its being suspected. Oh,
said I, Patty do not come with your bad news to me. Not that Emma was gay and
thoughtless from any real felicity; it was rather because she felt less
happy than she had expected. Weston; she was very often thinking of him,
and quite impatient for a letter, that she might know how he was, how
were his spirits, how was his aunt, and what was the chance of his
coming to Randalls again this spring. They may wish many things besides his
happiness: they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they
may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great
connections, and pride.”

“Beyond a doubt they do wish him to choose Miss Darcy,” replied Jane;
“but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. She says she is afraid there
will be draughts in the passage, though every thing has been done—One
door nailed up—Quantities of matting—My dear Jane, indeed you must. Willoughby will be incommoded by the attempts of either of
_my_ daughters towards what you call _catching him_. I always
regret excessively on dear Emma’s account that she cannot be more at
Highbury; but now their daughter is married, I suppose Colonel and Mrs. “When I got to Donwell,” said he, “Knightley could not be found. And I have no doubt that he _will_ thrive, and be a very
rich man in time—and his being illiterate and coarse need not disturb
_us_.”

“I wonder he did not remember the book”—was all Harriet’s answer, and
spoken with a degree of grave displeasure which Emma thought might be
safely left to itself. Weston would never marry again,
may comfort me for any thing.”

Mr. Goddard’s, her evil stars had led her to
the very spot where, at that moment, a trunk, directed to _The Rev. But now she is of age and may choose for
herself; and a pretty choice she has made!—What now,” after pausing a
moment—“your poor sister is gone to her own room, I suppose, to moan by
herself. So there I have the whip hand of you.”

Charlotte laughed heartily to think that her husband could not get rid
of her; and exultingly said, she did not care how cross he was to her,
as they must live together. “Dear Edward!” she cried, “this is a moment of great happiness!—This
would almost make amends for every thing!”

Edward tried to return her kindness as it deserved, but before such
witnesses he dared not say half what he really felt. At Brighton she will be of less importance
even as a common flirt than she has been here. “He had
better not be in a hurry. I an’t the least astonished at it
in the world, for I have often thought of late, there was nothing more
likely to happen.”

“You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel’s general benevolence;
but at least you could not foresee that the opportunity would so very
soon occur.”

“Opportunity!” repeated Mrs. He might be superseded by another; he
certainly would indeed; nothing could be clearer; even a Robert Martin
would have been sufficient; but nothing else, she feared, would cure
her. I see no sign of attachment—I
believe nothing of the pianoforte—and proof only shall convince me that
Mr. These apprehensions, perhaps, were not founded entirely on reason, and
certainly not at all on truth. Why
was the evil so dreadfully increased by Harriet’s having some hope of a
return? It was the end of
an old pencil,—the part without any lead. A little
time, therefore--I shall certainly try to get the better----”

With a stronger voice she soon added, “I have this comfort immediately,
that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it
has done no harm to anyone but myself.”

“My dear Jane,” exclaimed Elizabeth, “you are too good. John Dashwood had never been a favourite with
any of her husband’s family; but she had had no opportunity, till the
present, of showing them with how little attention to the comfort of
other people she could act when occasion required it. Elton came back, he told us
what John ostler had been telling him, and then it came out about the
chaise having been sent to Randalls to take Mr. I only hope they
may have half my good luck. Hurst looked at her with astonishment. But for Harriet’s sake, or rather
for my own, and as there are no husbands and wives in the case _at_
_present_, I will break my resolution now.”

Mr. And the Middletons too,
you must introduce me to _them_. to supply the place of what was taken away. Determined not to quit Marianne, though hopeless of
contributing, at present, to her ease, she hurried away to excuse
herself from attending Mrs. What am I to do?”

“Nothing, child, nothing. “I am sure I should have seen it in a moment, if Mrs. If Jane does not get well soon, we will call in Mr. I have been
walking all this way in complete suspense. A cold stormy rain set in,
and nothing of July appeared but in the trees and shrubs, which the
wind was despoiling, and the length of the day, which only made such
cruel sights the longer visible. No
intercourse with Harriet possible but by note; no church for her on
Sunday any more than on Christmas Day; and no need to find excuses for
Mr. Tell me, Willoughby; for heaven’s sake tell
me, what is the matter?”

He made no reply; his complexion changed and all his embarrassment
returned; but as if, on catching the eye of the young lady with whom he
had been previously talking, he felt the necessity of instant exertion,
he recovered himself again, and after saying, “Yes, I had the pleasure
of receiving the information of your arrival in town, which you were so
good as to send me,” turned hastily away with a slight bow and joined
his friend. Are you out of your senses to be
accepting this man? He had said that Jane
Fairfax received attentions from Mrs. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no
brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Mr. He asked me if he could do any thing....”

“Yes,” said Jane, “we heard his kind offers, we heard every thing.”

“Oh! I hope they will not meet at all. Elton was a vain woman, extremely well satisfied with herself, and
thinking much of her own importance; that she meant to shine and be
very superior, but with manners which had been formed in a bad school,
pert and familiar; that all her notions were drawn from one set of
people, and one style of living; that if not foolish she was ignorant,
and that her society would certainly do Mr. Elton and Miss Fairfax, who were standing a little
way behind her.—He was thoughtful. Weston was attending
to some one else—and the pause gave her time to reflect, “Now, how am I
going to introduce him?—Am I unequal to speaking his name at once
before all these people? I have really for some time past,
for at least these three months, cared nothing about him. Now is your time. Bennet
could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. She recovered her voice. His surprise was great. Churchill’s
death with mutual forbearance. Invite them both.”

“Both sir! Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the
neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that he
had yet seen, and speaking of the latter, especially, with gentle but
very intelligible gallantry. Her introductions and recommendations must all
wait, and every projected party be still only talked of. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after
the first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. But it _was_ said, I know, very well, and by more
than one; for Miss Godby told Miss Sparks, that nobody in their senses
could expect Mr. She then took another line of
expediency, and looking into the doubtful room, observed,

“I do not think it _is_ so very small. She
hoped it was not so. Her father never
went beyond the shrubbery, where two divisions of the ground sufficed
him for his long walk, or his short, as the year varied; and since Mrs. “I expected at least that the pigs
were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her
daughter!”

“La! This is my advice. Emma watched them in,
and then joined Harriet at the interesting counter,—trying, with all
the force of her own mind, to convince her that if she wanted plain
muslin it was of no use to look at figured; and that a blue ribbon, be
it ever so beautiful, would still never match her yellow pattern. I cannot
     understand it. Jane listened with astonishment and concern: she
knew not how to believe that Mr. I am sure you will like them;
indeed, you _do_ like them, you know, very much already, and so does my
mother; and they are such favourites with Harry!”

Mr. That he had cut me ever since my marriage, I had seen without
surprise or resentment. My mother often wonders that I can make it out so well. She
must own that she was tired of great houses: after going over so many,
she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains. What a stroke was this for poor Jane,
who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that
so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind as was here
collected in one individual! Darcy,” cried a young Lucas, who came with his
sisters, “I should not care how proud I was. His dejection was most evident. As soon as Mrs. If you knew what a consolation it was to me to relieve my heart
speaking to you of what I am always thinking of every moment of my
life, your compassion would make you overlook every thing else I am
sure.”

“Indeed, I can easily believe that it was a very great relief to you,
to acknowledge your situation to me, and be assured that you shall
never have reason to repent it. Weston to correspond with me. how could it be?—Then I must have
dreamt it—but I was completely persuaded—Miss Smith, you walk as if you
were tired. Knightley!—never seen him in her life before, and call him
Knightley!—and discover that he is a gentleman! Collins had followed
him after breakfast, and there he would continue, nominally engaged with
one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr. Mrs. The respect created by the conviction of his
valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some
time ceased to be repugnant to her feelings; and it was now heightened
into somewhat of a friendlier nature by the testimony so highly in his
favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light,
which yesterday had produced. It came from town, and is merely a letter of business.”

“But how came the hand to discompose you so much, if it was only a
letter of business? It was merely a blind to conceal his real
situation with another.—It was his object to blind all about him; and
no one, I am sure, could be more effectually blinded than myself—except
that I was _not_ blinded—that it was my good fortune—that, in short, I
was somehow or other safe from him.”

She had hoped for an answer here—for a few words to say that her
conduct was at least intelligible; but he was silent; and, as far as
she could judge, deep in thought. Who should suffer but myself? She saw all the glories of the camp: its tents
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young
and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she
saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six
officers at once. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin,
and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine
their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantel-piece, the
interval of waiting appeared very long. “No, ma’am, for my mistress.”

But Marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up. CHAPTER XIII


The weather continued much the same all the following morning; and the
same loneliness, and the same melancholy, seemed to reign at
Hartfield—but in the afternoon it cleared; the wind changed into a
softer quarter; the clouds were carried off; the sun appeared; it was
summer again. Oh, what hours of transport we shall spend! Is not it what you have often wished to do
yourself?”

“Yes, Marianne, but I would not go while Mrs. Your
    brother has gained my affections entirely, and as we could not live
    without one another, we are just returned from the altar, and are
    now on our way to Dawlish for a few weeks, which place your dear
    brother has great curiosity to see, but thought I would first
    trouble you with these few lines, and shall always remain,


“Your sincere well-wisher, friend, and sister,
“LUCY FERRARS. She had sent while
dressing, and the answer had been, “Much the same—not better.”

“_My_ report from Mrs. She felt that half this folly must
be drunkenness, and therefore could hope that it might belong only to
the passing hour. Weston pays her visit, I may be allowed, I hope,” said
Frank Churchill, “to join your party and wait for her at Hartfield—if
you are going home.”

Mrs. Promise me, therefore, to
come to Hunsford.”

Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the
visit. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general
Charlotte wisely did not hear. A single
woman, with a very narrow income, must be a ridiculous, disagreeable
old maid! What relates to yourself is as follows:--‘Having thus
offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. In spite of all her faults, she knew
she was dear to him; might she not say, very dear?—When the suggestions
of hope, however, which must follow here, presented themselves, she
could not presume to indulge them. Bingley had never met with pleasanter people or prettier
girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him;
there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted
with all the room; and as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel
more beautiful. a very agreeable
young man to be sure; I know him very well.”

“How can you say so, Anne?” cried Lucy, who generally made an amendment
to all her sister’s assertions. Elton’s only
objection, and Mr. The letter F—had been likewise
invariably brought forward, and found productive of such countless
jokes, that its character as the wittiest letter in the alphabet had
been long established with Elinor. Were it for nothing but his love of you, I
must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley’s friend and your
husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. _There_, indeed, lay real pleasure, for
there she was giving up the sweetest hours of the twenty-four to his
comfort; and feeling that, unmerited as might be the degree of his fond
affection and confiding esteem, she could not, in her general conduct,
be open to any severe reproach. Such language for a young man entirely dependent, to
use!—Nobody but you, Mr. It darted through her, with the speed of an arrow, that Mr. After sitting long enough to admire
every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the
fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had
happened in London, Mr. and Mrs. Dashwood should not like to go into public.”

They thanked her; but were obliged to resist all her entreaties. The heat overcame me.”

“It is hotter to-day.”

“Not to my feelings. Do not you begin to feel that now? He must be
starved, you know, that is certain; absolutely starved.”

He had just settled this point with great composure, when the entrance
of Mrs. He promised to join me
here, and pay his respects to you.”

“What! If her sisters intended to walk on the downs,
she directly stole away towards the lanes; if they talked of the
valley, she was as speedy in climbing the hills, and could never be
found when the others set off. I could not excuse a man’s having more music than love—more ear
than eye—a more acute sensibility to fine sounds than to my feelings. Every body
does not hunt.”

Marianne coloured as she replied, “But most people do.”

“I wish,” said Margaret, striking out a novel thought, “that somebody
would give us all a large fortune apiece!”

“Oh that they would!” cried Marianne, her eyes sparkling with
animation, and her cheeks glowing with the delight of such imaginary
happiness. He
certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that
look was disputable. She merely said, in
the course of some trivial chat, “Well, Harriet, whenever you marry I
would advise you to do so and so”—and thought no more of it, till after
a minute’s silence she heard Harriet say in a very serious tone, “I
shall never marry.”

Emma then looked up, and immediately saw how it was; and after a
moment’s debate, as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not,
replied,

“Never marry!—This is a new resolution.”

“It is one that I shall never change, however.”

After another short hesitation, “I hope it does not proceed from—I hope
it is not in compliment to Mr. “I have reason to think,” he replied, “that Harriet Smith will soon
have an offer of marriage, and from a most unexceptionable
quarter:—Robert Martin is the man. When
you tell me to love him as a brother, I shall no more see imperfection
in his face, than I now do in his heart.”

Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for the warmth she
had been betrayed into, in speaking of him. To do him justice, he did every thing in his power to promote their
unreserve, by making the Miss Steeles acquainted with whatever he knew
or supposed of his cousins’ situations in the most delicate
particulars; and Elinor had not seen them more than twice, before the
eldest of them wished her joy on her sister’s having been so lucky as
to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she came to Barton. It made him so very unhappy, indeed, that it could not be
persevered in. He sat
musing a little while, and then said,

“But I do not see why poor Isabella should be obliged to go back so
soon, though he does. Her
mother’s affliction was hardly less, and Elinor was the only one of the
three, who seemed to consider the separation as any thing short of
eternal. He expressed great pleasure
in meeting Elinor, told her that he had been just going to call in
Berkeley Street, and, assuring her that Fanny would be very glad to see
her, invited her to come in. Elton was actually on his road to
London, and not meaning to return till the morrow, though it was the
whist-club night, which he had been never known to miss before; and Mr. Emma
remained very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance, and
could now engage to think of them all at Randalls any hour of the day,
with full confidence in their comfort. She wrote even to
Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former
professions of regard. At ten years old, she had the misfortune of being able
to answer questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and
will save all the best of the coveys for you.”

Elizabeth’s misery increased at such unnecessary, such officious
attention! Knightley always at hand, when he were once got used to
the idea.—Did he not love Mr. Her sensibilities, I suspect, are strong—and her
temper excellent in its power of forbearance, patience, self-control;
but it wants openness. Their table was superlatively stupid. “Should I send it to Mrs. I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no further on the
subject.”

“Not so hasty, if you please. It was within four miles
northward of Exeter. “A very pleasant evening,” he began, as soon as Mr. “You may depend upon me,” said she. Elinor’s satisfaction, at the moment of removal, was more positive. And Elizabeth, too. No—pray let
her have time to look about her.”

“I have always thought it a very foolish intimacy,” said Mr. I scarcely know any one who cannot do all this; and I am
sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without
being informed that she was very accomplished.”

“Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,” said Darcy, “has
too much truth. She was perfectly disposed to make every
allowance for the colonel’s advanced state of life which humanity
required. Elizabeth
noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an
attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. But every circumstance that
could embitter such an evil seemed uniting to heighten the misery of
Marianne in a final separation from Willoughby—in an immediate and
irreconcilable rupture with him. If in the supposition of his seeking to marry herself, his difficulties
from his mother had seemed great, how much greater were they now likely
to be, when the object of his engagement was undoubtedly inferior in
connections, and probably inferior in fortune to herself. He
wished to persuade Mr. He will think all the happiness, all the
advantage, on your side of the question; all the merit on mine. “How abominable! They are excellent
neighbours to you in the country, I understand.”

“Excellent indeed. But it ought to
be done; and if you will give me a sheet of paper it shall be done
directly.”

“And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you, and
admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. We were speaking of it only
yesterday, and agreeing how fortunate it was for Emma, that there
should be such a girl in Highbury for her to associate with. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the
family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman’s conduct;
but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern,
and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen
to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. And their
mother had the satisfaction of knowing, that she should be able to show
her married daughter in the neighbourhood, before she was banished to
the north. Weston to
invite her to an airing; she had drawn back and declined at first, but,
on being pressed had yielded; and, in the course of their drive, Mrs. La! I am sure he was particularly
silent when Mrs. While waiting till the other young people could pair themselves off,
Emma found time, in spite of the compliments she was receiving on her
voice and her taste, to look about, and see what became of Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and
on these occasions Mrs. His attendance was by this means secured, and
the rest followed in course. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger
dependence on my judgment than on his own. You must, therefore, allow me to follow the
dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which lead me to perform
what I look on as a point of duty. One is so fenced
and guarded from the weather, that not a breath of air can find its way
unpermitted. I never saw such a likeness.”

The next thing wanted was to get the picture framed; and here were a
few difficulties. There was a strange rumour in Highbury of all the little Perrys being
seen with a slice of Mrs. Weston’s ball was to be a real thing. I have by no means done. Their fortune on
both sides is splendid. Two steps, Jane, take
care of the two steps. This is always the way with him! The shower was heavy, but short; and it had not been over five minutes,
when in came Harriet, with just the heated, agitated look which
hurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give; and the “Oh! All was acknowledged,
and half the night spent in conversation. Your younger sisters must
be very young?”

“Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Harriet’s
staying away so long was beginning to make her uneasy. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who
had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no
likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken. Sir William had been
delighted with him. and to see you in such excellent
looks!—I would not have missed this meeting for the world. Darcy. I had not believed
it possible.”

“I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeth. The evening of this day was very long, and melancholy, at Hartfield. Bennet’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was
eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,--

“Well, Jane, who is it from? It was a sad event—a great shock—with all her faults, what
would Mr. He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken
on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a
research; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he
must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently
meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe the man whom he always
most wished to avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to
pronounce. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to
utter a syllable. If _he_
wishes to avoid seeing _me_ he must go. Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of
his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his
having slighted one of her daughters. The old lady is Mrs. Stokes would not know her own room again. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching
the progress of his letter, and repeatedly calling off his attention by
messages to his sister. But, however, so it is. Knightley actually looked red with surprize and displeasure, as he
stood up, in tall indignation, and said,

“Then she is a greater simpleton than I ever believed her. “Will Mr. He was so busy the last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot
it, but he goes again to-morrow. I am sure it almost killed me once.”

“Come, come,” cried Emma, feeling this to be an unsafe subject, “I must
beg you not to talk of the sea. Mrs. Jennings, leaning forward towards Elinor, and speaking in a low voice
as if she meant to be heard by no one else, though they were seated on
different sides of the room; “but, however, I can’t help wishing they
had not travelled quite so fast, nor made such a long journey of it,
for they came all round by London upon account of some business, for
you know (nodding significantly and pointing to her daughter) it was
wrong in her situation. The first month after their marriage was spent with their friend at the
Mansion-house; from whence they could superintend the progress of the
Parsonage, and direct every thing as they liked on the spot;—could
chuse papers, project shrubberies, and invent a sweep. And so, just as he was going away again, it
came into my head, I am sure I do not know how I happened to think of
it, but it came into my head to ask him if there was any news. Jennings, was the easiest means
of atoning for his own neglect. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not
disgrace you: and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated,
especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Miss Eliza (glancing
at her sister and Bingley), shall take place. But I have always observed, that they who are
good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he
was always the sweetest tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the
world.”

Elizabeth almost stared at her. The decree is issued by somebody. She was proceeding
directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. He
fancied bathing might be good for it—the warm bath—but she says it did
him no lasting benefit. Certain it was that she
was to come; and that Highbury, instead of welcoming that perfect
novelty which had been so long promised it—Mr. He might even have Harriet in his thoughts at the moment; who could
say? Woodhouse was almost as glad to see him now, as he would have been
sorry to see him before. Elton’s house, which, as well as the church, he would
go and look at, and would not join them in finding much fault with. You will find, whenever the
subject becomes freed from its present restraints, that it did not take
her wholly by surprize. Her tears fell abundantly—but her grief was so truly artless, that no
dignity could have made it more respectable in Emma’s eyes—and she
listened to her and tried to console her with all her heart and
understanding—really for the time convinced that Harriet was the
superior creature of the two—and that to resemble her would be more for
her own welfare and happiness than all that genius or intelligence
could do. It was
engrossed by the extraordinary silence of her sister and Willoughby on
the subject, which they must know to be peculiarly interesting to them
all. Gardiner; and, after relating the
circumstances, she thus went on:--“I am now convinced, my dear aunt,
that I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that
pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name,
and wish him all manner of evil. I am sure,
rather than run the risk of hurting Mr. poor Miss Taylor! Elton, as
elegant as lace and pearls could make her, he looked at in
silence—wanting only to observe enough for Isabella’s information—but
Miss Fairfax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl, and he could
talk to her. In he walked, the first and the
handsomest; and after paying his compliments en passant to Miss Bates
and her niece, made his way directly to the opposite side of the
circle, where sat Miss Woodhouse; and till he could find a seat by her,
would not sit at all. But there are many works well worth reading at the
Park; and there are others of more modern production which I know I can
borrow of Colonel Brandon. It was not with Mrs. I do indeed. “How much they
must enjoy it! Mr. Oh, Lydia!”

“I comfort myself with thinking,” replied Jane, “that he certainly would
not marry Lydia, if he had not a real regard for her. She had very little notice from any but him. I have quite a
horror of upstarts. “We should not like her so well as we do, sir, if we could
suppose it; but she knows how much the marriage is to Miss Taylor’s
advantage; she knows how very acceptable it must be, at Miss Taylor’s
time of life, to be settled in a home of her own, and how important to
her to be secure of a comfortable provision, and therefore cannot allow
herself to feel so much pain as pleasure. Her mother
impatiently met her at the door of her dressing-room, to ask why Lady
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself. Only three of us.—besides dear Jane at present—and she really
eats nothing—makes such a shocking breakfast, you would be quite
frightened if you saw it. He stopped at Highbury, at the Bates’s, I fancy, some time—and
then came on hither; but was in such a hurry to get back to his uncle,
to whom he is just now more necessary than ever, that, as I tell you,
he could stay with us but a quarter of an hour.—He was very much
agitated—very much, indeed—to a degree that made him appear quite a
different creature from any thing I had ever seen him before.—In
addition to all the rest, there had been the shock of finding her so
very unwell, which he had had no previous suspicion of—and there was
every appearance of his having been feeling a great deal.”

“And do you really believe the affair to have been carrying on with
such perfect secresy?—The Campbells, the Dixons, did none of them know
of the engagement?”

Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little blush. Weston. Such
things in general cannot be too short.”

Harriet was too intent on the lines to hear. pray, Miss Margaret, let us know all about it,” said Mrs. Woodhouse:

“This will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagements, sir. In a country life I
conceive it to be a sort of necessary; for, let a woman have ever so
many resources, it is not possible for her to be always shut up at
home;—and very long walks, you know—in summer there is dust, and in
winter there is dirt.”

“You will not find either, between Donwell and Highbury. She
could think of nothing else; and yet, whether Bingley’s regard had
really died away, or were suppressed by his friends’ interference;
whether he had been aware of Jane’s attachment, or whether it had
escaped his observation; whichever were the case, though her opinion of
him must be materially affected by the difference, her sister’s
situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded. Palmer
laughed heartily at the recollection of their astonishment, and every
body agreed, two or three times over, that it had been quite an
agreeable surprise. Weston was too anxious
for his being a favourite with Mr. As
for _his_ going, Emma did not wish him to think it possible, the hours
would be too late, and the party too numerous. Elton. Elton and Jane Fairfax were talking of.—A situation,
a most desirable situation, was in question. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was
ignorant of the truth myself. “I told you the other day
of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Ford the trouble of two
parcels.”

“No more it is.”

“No trouble in the world, ma’am,” said the obliging Mrs. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intention
as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?”

“Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter--Darcy must speak for
himself.”

“You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine,
but which I have never acknowledged. The others then joined her, and expressed their admiration of his
figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and, wholly engrossed by her own
feelings, followed them in silence. Gone to Mr. I have the honour of being acquainted with a
neighbour of yours, (turning to Emma,) a lady residing in or near
Highbury; a family of the name of Fairfax. However, you will think of all that at
your leisure.”

“Certainly, ma’am,” replied Elinor, not hearing much of what she said,
and more anxious to be alone, than to be mistress of the subject. “This is very true,” said she, “at least as far as relates to me, which
was all that was meant—and it is very shameful.—Of the same age—and
always knowing her—I ought to have been more her friend.—She will never
like me now. When Mr. Mrs. The
first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know, was at
a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages
you will have! Weston engaged to lose no
time in writing, and spare no arguments to induce him to come. Her former apprehensions, now with greater reason restored, left her no
doubt of the event; and though trying to speak comfort to Elinor, her
conviction of her sister’s danger would not allow her to offer the
comfort of hope. Jennings’s maid
with her sister, she hurried down stairs. He was the only person in the world who could at that moment be
forgiven for not being Willoughby; the only one who could have gained a
smile from her; but she dispersed her tears to smile on _him_, and in
her sister’s happiness forgot for a time her own disappointment. Martin. Elton actually making violent love to her: availing himself of the
precious opportunity, declaring sentiments which must be already well
known, hoping—fearing—adoring—ready to die if she refused him; but
flattering himself that his ardent attachment and unequalled love and
unexampled passion could not fail of having some effect, and in short,
very much resolved on being seriously accepted as soon as possible. I am quite determined to refuse him. You had much better
dance.”

“I certainly shall not. I am afraid you must
have had a shocking walk.”

“Not at all, sir. With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity,
Elizabeth opened the letter, and to her still increasing wonder,
perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter paper, written
quite through, in a very close hand. They were not the only objects of Mr. I am serious, Miss Woodhouse, whatever your penetrating
eyes may fancy—I am sick of England—and would leave it to-morrow, if I
could.”

“You are sick of prosperity and indulgence. His behaviour to us has,
     in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire. Eltons, the Mrs. Woodhouse?—I am so glad.—Quite out of my power.—Such a happy little
circle as you find us here.—Yes, indeed.—Charming young man!—that is—so
very friendly; I mean good Mr. However, it was an exceeding
good, pretty letter, and gave Mr. It will certainly be much the best way. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other
miniatures, over the mantel-piece. It was Mr. I wonder you
should think it possible for me to have such feelings. But, alas! The
Churchills might not have a word to say in return; but then, you would
have no habits of early obedience and long observance to break through. how rich
and how great you will be! Darcy has
never seen the view.”

“It may do very well for the others,” replied Mr. I do not pretend to Emma’s
genius for foretelling and guessing. Darcy and herself. Elizabeth
was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and
pleased. I shall do _that_ directly. “Well, Monday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! Weston gives me a decided prejudice in his favour.”

“He is a person I never think of from one month’s end to another,” said
Mr. Elinor, affected by his relation, and still more by his
distress, could not speak. How did you
all behave? Dashwood ill?’ So then it all came out; and the long and the short of
the matter, by all I can learn, seems to be this. If I could but see her again!—But
I must not propose it yet. In books too, as well as in
music, she courted the misery which a contrast between the past and
present was certain of giving. I am sure I do not know.”

“Ah! Collins is a
conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man: you know he is, as well as
I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who marries him
cannot have a proper way of thinking. And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone. The event was more favourable to Mr. Lizzy is not a bit better than the
others: and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so
good-humoured as Lydia. Churchill had been recommended to the medical skill of
an eminent person there, and had otherwise a fancy for the place. But the
feelings of her sister were instantly expressed. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier. It was necessary to the
happiness of both; for however dissimilar in temper and outward
behaviour, they strongly resembled each other in that total want of
talent and taste which confined their employments, unconnected with
such as society produced, within a very narrow compass. Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. CHAPTER XVIII. My feelings in every respect
forbid it. “I should not have thought it possible,” she began, “that you could
have misunderstood me! And he, the very
handsomest man that ever was, and a man that every body looks up to,
quite like Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. “I must spend some time with them; I am sure they will want
it;—afterwards I may probably be glad to dispose of myself. The one mis-sent must be first attended to; it had been
written five days ago. Dashwood’s and Elinor’s appetites were equally lost, and Margaret
might think herself very well off, that with so much uneasiness as both
her sisters had lately experienced, so much reason as they had often
had to be careless of their meals, she had never been obliged to go
without her dinner before. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented
himself with coolly replying, that he perceived no other alteration than
her being rather tanned,--no miraculous consequence of travelling in the
summer. “I know not, Miss Elizabeth,” said he, “whether Mrs. Mrs. I have seen Mr. She had not
been prepared to have Jane Fairfax succeed Mr. Mrs. These causes must be stated, though briefly. Weston, poor Mrs. But had I been informed of it a few hours earlier, I think
it is most probable that something might have been hit on. Till they all come in I shall not
be missed; and when they do, will you have the goodness to say that I
am gone?”

“Certainly, if you wish it;—but you are not going to walk to Highbury
alone?”

“Yes—what should hurt me?—I walk fast. You do not look
well. It was perfectly accordant with
that resolution of character which I knew her to possess; and the
secrecy she had maintained, as to any such design in her former letter,
was equally descriptive of its anxious delicacy. “How could
you begin?” said she. I might have sold it again, the next day, for
more than I gave: but, with regard to the purchase-money, I might have
been very unfortunate indeed; for the stocks were at that time so low,
that if I had not happened to have the necessary sum in my banker’s
hands, I must have sold out to very great loss.”

Elinor could only smile. Collins, was a
most humiliating picture! On the
following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. Oh! It has
connected him nearer with virtue than any other feeling. “Well, mamma,” said she, when they were all returned to the
breakfast-room, “and what do you think of my husband? Marianne’s eagerness to be
gone declared her dependence on finding him there; and Elinor was
resolved not only upon gaining every new light as to his character
which her own observation or the intelligence of others could give her,
but likewise upon watching his behaviour to her sister with such
zealous attention, as to ascertain what he was and what he meant,
before many meetings had taken place. Elton, of which Mr. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your
happiness. But it is not in my power to
delay my journey for one day!”

“If you would but let us know what your business is,” said Mrs. Jennings no language, within her reach in her
moments of happiest eloquence, could have expressed; and now she could
reproach her only by the tears which streamed from her eyes with
passionate violence—a reproach, however, so entirely lost on its
object, that after many expressions of pity, she withdrew, still
referring her to the letter of comfort. Mrs. I have no objections at all to meeting
the Hartfield family. Knightley called one
morning, and Jane was eating these apples, and we talked about them and
said how much she enjoyed them, and he asked whether we were not got to
the end of our stock. yes, quite indispensable.”

Miss Bates looked about her, so happily—! The evening before this great event (for it was a very great event that
Mr. But Jane was to go home with her, and at
Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation. With the
view of passing off an awkward moment, Emma smilingly said,

“You must make my apologies to your friend; but so good a charade must
not be confined to one or two. Elton should not be really in love
with her, or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking to
disappoint him—that Harriet’s nature should not be of that superior
sort in which the feelings are most acute and retentive—and that there
could be no necessity for any body’s knowing what had passed except the
three principals, and especially for her father’s being given a
moment’s uneasiness about it. And,
indeed, though my mother’s eyes are not so good as they were, she can
see amazingly well still, thank God! What are
you proud of? Goldsmith tells us, that when lovely woman stoops
to folly, she has nothing to do but to die; and when she stoops to be
disagreeable, it is equally to be recommended as a clearer of ill-fame. The
     children have been wanting me this half hour. She happened to be quite alone. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form
of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as
may convince you of its being one.”

“You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your
refusal of my addresses are merely words of course. Harriet exactly. In a doleful voice Mrs. “Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?”

“I have, sir.”

“Very well. This event had very lately taken place; too lately for any thing to be
yet attempted by her less fortunate friend towards entering on her path
of duty; though she had now reached the age which her own judgment had
fixed on for beginning. yes, gloves and every thing. Let me hear from you without delay; I am
impatient for a thousand particulars. Bingley was by no means
deficient; but Darcy was clever. Which of them is it?—I charge you
by all that is sacred, not to attempt concealment.”

“Upon my word, Emma.”—

“Your word!—why not your honour!—why not say upon your honour, that it
has nothing to do with any of them? She avoided the looks of them all, could
neither eat nor speak, and after some time, on her mother’s silently
pressing her hand with tender compassion, her small degree of fortitude
was quite overcome, she burst into tears and left the room. my dear sir, as my mother says, our friends are only too good to
us. I dare say the Colonel will
leave her all his fortune.”

When Sir John returned, he joined most heartily in the general regret
on so unfortunate an event; concluding however by observing, that as
they were all got together, they must do something by way of being
happy; and after some consultation it was agreed, that although
happiness could only be enjoyed at Whitwell, they might procure a
tolerable composure of mind by driving about the country. She was in no hurry at all. Woodhouse, who had already taken his little round in the highest part
of the gardens, where no damps from the river were imagined even by
him, stirred no more; and his daughter resolved to remain with him,
that Mrs. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him,
was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was
pleased to think how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,
is he? Martin is a very respectable young man,
but I cannot admit him to be Harriet’s equal; and am rather surprized
indeed that he should have ventured to address her. Her face was averted from those who had made the
attack, and turned towards her aunt. Elton’s resources were
inadequate to such an attack. But ah! Think she
must of the possible difference to the poor little boy; and yet she
only gave herself a saucy conscious smile about it, and found amusement
in detecting the real cause of that violent dislike of Mr. But what shall I say? Elinor only was sorry to see them. Miss Nash, head-teacher at Mrs. Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself; but his manners
were always so pleasing, that, had his character and his marriage been
exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he
claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings. I was sometimes
     quite provoked; but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane,
     and for their sakes had patience with her. Weston’s
partiality for him is very great, and, as you may suppose, most
gratifying to me. Knightley, were
to be transported and placed all at once in Mr. If, in the explanation of them which is due
to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be
offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. Dashwood, as they were at breakfast the
last morning, “you would be a happier man if you had any profession to
engage your time and give an interest to your plans and actions. You
seem shut out from every thing—in the most complete retirement.—And
Mrs. What is it?”

“Something so strange! She would be placed in the midst of those who loved her,
and who had better sense than herself; retired enough for safety, and
occupied enough for cheerfulness. If we
find they correspond, every fear of mine will be removed.”

“A mighty concession indeed! Ferrars’s flattering language as only a lesser evil than his
chusing Lucy Steele, she feared that Robert’s offence would serve no
other purpose than to enrich Fanny. It was folly to be disturbed
by it. While
there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while
Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there for
ever. After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was
tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and
look into the park. But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object;
Miss Bingley’s eyes were instantly turned towards Darcy, and she had
something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. It was
badly done, indeed! “His fortune too!—for at my time of life you know, everybody cares
about _that;_—and though I neither know nor desire to know, what it
really is, I am sure it must be a good one.”

Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a third person, and
Elinor withdrew to think it all over in private, to wish success to her
friend, and yet in wishing it, to feel a pang for Willoughby. Have you seen any pleasant men? She received the news with resolute composure; made no observation on
it, and at first shed no tears; but after a short time they would burst
out, and for the rest of the day, she was in a state hardly less
pitiable than when she first learnt to expect the event. In Lydia’s imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised
every possibility of earthly happiness. Instead of drawing his brother off to a window while they
waited for dinner, he was talking to Miss Fairfax. She was immediately told, that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each
called during her absence; Mr. Weston had accompanied her to Mrs. The power of disappointing
them, it was true, must always be hers. “How very odd!” said she, in a low and disappointed voice, as she
turned away to the window. Her eagerness to be gone from Norland was preserved from diminution by
the evident satisfaction of her daughter-in-law in the prospect of her
removal; a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be concealed
under a cold invitation to her to defer her departure. Elton’s side soon afterwards appeared,
and she was left in peace—neither forced to be the very particular
friend of Mrs. This however was not the case. Ferrars was a little, thin woman, upright, even to formality, in
her figure, and serious, even to sourness, in her aspect. one can think of nothing
else.”

“And really, I do not think the impression will soon be over,” said
Emma, as she crossed the low hedge, and tottering footstep which ended
the narrow, slippery path through the cottage garden, and brought them
into the lane again. Darcy, chose for her employment the
examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her
being in Kent. Mrs. “As to that,” said he, “I must rub through the world as well as I can. “She has been indisposed all day, and
we have persuaded her to go to bed.”

“Perhaps, then,” he hesitatingly replied, “what I heard this morning
may be—there may be more truth in it than I could believe possible at
first.”

“What did you hear?”

“That a gentleman, whom I had reason to think—in short, that a man,
whom I _knew_ to be engaged—but how shall I tell you? Mr. As a brother, a landlord, a master, she
considered how many people’s happiness were in his guardianship! She must not make it
a more decided subject of misery to him, by a melancholy tone herself. I will write to my sister Gardiner about
them directly. ‘My friend Knightley’ had been so often
mentioned, that I was really impatient to see him; and I must do my
cara sposo the justice to say that he need not be ashamed of his
friend. Better be without sense, than misapply
it as you do.”

“To be sure!” cried she playfully. You are so strange! Jennings, though forced, on examination, to
acknowledge a temporary revival, tried to keep her young friend from
indulging a thought of its continuance;—and Elinor, conning over every
injunction of distrust, told herself likewise not to hope. Elton, how elegant she
looks!—Beautiful lace!—Now we all follow in her train. CHAPTER III. “What! Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mrs. To her voluntary communications Emma could get no more approving reply,
than,

“Very well. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to
Brighton. I
must have my share in the conversation, if you are speaking of music. She treated her therefore, with all the
indulgent fondness of a parent towards a favourite child on the last
day of its holidays. Perry to be that sort of character. Sir John was loud in his
admiration at the end of every song, and as loud in his conversation
with the others while every song lasted. I do not know what you and Mr. hang Kitty! If meant to be immediately mixed with the others, and
buried from sight, she should have looked on the table instead of
looking just across, for it was not mixed; and Harriet, eager after
every fresh word, and finding out none, directly took it up, and fell
to work. “Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas,” she added, in a melancholy tone;
“for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me; I am cruelly used,
nobody feels for my poor nerves.”

Charlotte’s reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth. Mr. but those two lines are”—

—“The best of all. You have got your answer ready.”

Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject, but the approach of
her own party made another more necessary. Knightley. Ferrars’s way of treating me yesterday? “Oh! With regard to her not accompanying them to Ireland, her account to her
aunt contained nothing but truth, though there might be some truths not
told. He knows that he is a very handsome young man, and a great favourite
wherever he goes; and from his general way of talking in unreserved
moments, when there are only men present, I am convinced that he does
not mean to throw himself away. They have at
least that advantage.”

“The country,” said Darcy, “can in general supply but few subjects for
such a study. Jennings has heard all about it. Ay, it is but too true. The two grandmothers, with not less partiality, but more sincerity,
were equally earnest in support of their own descendant. I can hardly believe it.—I thought I knew
him.”

Emma scarcely heard what was said.—Her mind was divided between two
ideas—her own former conversations with him about Miss Fairfax; and
poor Harriet;—and for some time she could only exclaim, and require
confirmation, repeated confirmation. I promised my wife to
leave it all to her. She went on, however. with
a deep sigh, that he wished I might find as much happiness in the
marriage state as he had done.—I felt that it would be of a different
sort.—Are you disposed to pity me for what I must have suffered in
opening the cause to him, for my suspense while all was at stake?—No;
do not pity me till I reached Highbury, and saw how ill I had made her. Pratt was a foundation for the rest,
at once indisputable and alarming; and Edward’s visit near Plymouth,
his melancholy state of mind, his dissatisfaction at his own prospects,
his uncertain behaviour towards herself, the intimate knowledge of the
Miss Steeles as to Norland and their family connections, which had
often surprised her, the picture, the letter, the ring, formed
altogether such a body of evidence, as overcame every fear of
condemning him unfairly, and established as a fact, which no partiality
could set aside, his ill-treatment of herself.—Her resentment of such
behaviour, her indignation at having been its dupe, for a short time
made her feel only for herself; but other ideas, other considerations,
soon arose. Willoughby opened the piano-forte, and asked
Marianne to sit down to it; and thus amidst the various endeavours of
different people to quit the topic, it fell to the ground. “Well, if
you give me such kind encouragement, Mr. He must be gone
within a few hours, though without feeling any real alarm for his aunt,
to lessen his repugnance. But the resolution was made only to be broken. He thought principally of
Mrs. Generous, good man, I am afraid he has
distressed himself. Collins devoted his
mornings to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country: but
when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments,
and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her
cousin by the alteration; for the chief of the time between breakfast
and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden, or in
reading and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room,
which fronted the road. Weston’s accounting for it with “I suppose they will not take the
liberty with you; they know you do not dine out,” was not quite
sufficient. “Well, sir,” said Elinor, who, though pitying him, grew impatient for
his departure, “and this is all?”

“All!—no:—have you forgot what passed in town? His fear of her has always operated, I
know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his
wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I am certain he
has very much at heart.”

Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a
slight inclination of the head. Jennings, as soon as he
entered the room. Willoughby was
all that her fancy had delineated in that unhappy hour and in every
brighter period, as capable of attaching her; and his behaviour
declared his wishes to be in that respect as earnest, as his abilities
were strong. Jennings on her side treated them both with all
possible kindness, was solicitous on every occasion for their ease and
enjoyment, and only disturbed that she could not make them choose their
own dinners at the inn, nor extort a confession of their preferring
salmon to cod, or boiled fowls to veal cutlets. Her good-nature, too, is
not so very slight a claim, comprehending, as it does, real, thorough
sweetness of temper and manner, a very humble opinion of herself, and a
great readiness to be pleased with other people. Willoughby’s death. “I have just had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. Weston and Mr. But between _us_, I am convinced there never can be any
likeness, except in being unmarried.”

“But still, you will be an old maid! Darcy handed the
ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him
walking slowly towards the house. my sins, my sins!—And I had plenty all the while in my
pocket!—One of my senseless tricks!—I deserve to be under a continual
blush all the rest of my life.—Well—(sitting down again)—go on—what
else?”

“And had you really some at hand yourself? When they had paid their tribute of
politeness by curtsying to the lady of the house, they were permitted
to mingle in the crowd, and take their share of the heat and
inconvenience, to which their arrival must necessarily add. She had taken up a wrong idea, fancying it was a mother and
daughter, a son and son’s wife, who all lived together; but when it
appeared that the Mr. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by
being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.”

[Illustration: “The entreaties of several” [_Copyright 1894 by George
Allen._]]

On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have
any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such
a subject to him, which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she
turned to him and said,--

“Did not you think, Mr. I would lay any wager it is about
Miss Williams. she was in hysterics all yesterday. “I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and my mother,” added
Elinor; “and once or twice I have attempted it;—but without betraying
my trust, I never could have convinced you.”

“Four months! He has too much real feeling
to address any woman on the haphazard of selfish passion. Fatigued as she had been by the morning’s walk, they had
no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former
acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an
intercourse renewed after many years’ discontinuance. “Very like Maple Grove indeed!—She was quite struck by the
likeness!—That room was the very shape and size of the morning-room at
Maple Grove; her sister’s favourite room.”—Mr. I remember it was written from Weymouth, and dated Sept. He did
everything best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds
on the first of September than anybody else in the country. But she would not
allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be
said, for the present. After
the first chat of pleasure he was silent; and then, in a graver tone,
began with,

“I have something to tell you, Emma; some news.”

“Good or bad?” said she, quickly, looking up in his face. But that
is nothing to us. Frank Churchill, was willing to forget his late
improprieties, and be as well satisfied with him as before, and on his
making Harriet his very first subject, was ready to listen with most
friendly smiles. I can safely say I owe you no ill-will, and am
    sure you will be too generous to do us any ill offices. Darcy was attending them to their carriage,
Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth’s
person, behaviour, and dress. The land was so very desirable for me in every
respect, so immediately adjoining my own property, that I felt it my
duty to buy it. Elton. Palmer;—“Not
that I ever spoke to him, indeed; but I have seen him for ever in town. Elton, spruce, black, and smiling, was with them instantly. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner; and then
added,--

“May I take the liberty of asking your Ladyship whether you left Mr. But if you want to shew
him any attention, my dear, ask him to come and dine with us some day. The
latter, though unable to speak, seemed to feel all the tenderness of
this behaviour, and after some time thus spent in joint affliction, she
put all the letters into Elinor’s hands; and then covering her face
with her handkerchief, almost screamed with agony. Bingley. After very little farther discourse, it was finally settled that the
invitation should be fully accepted. It was
the last of the regiment’s stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in
the neighbourhood were drooping apace. Knightley not wanting to quarrel with her, how very happy a summer
must be before her! Hodges _would_ be cross sometimes, and as long as so many sacks were
sold, it did not signify who ate the remainder. You will find some friends here.”

So began Miss Bates; and Mr. I have a very sincere interest in Emma. Churchill?”

She had soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning was
already made, and could not but hope that the gipsy, though she had
_told_ no fortune, might be proved to have made Harriet’s.—About a
fortnight after the alarm, they came to a sufficient explanation, and
quite undesignedly. At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of
Elizabeth after the health of her family. With a
book, he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a
good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised
such splendid expectations. “How horrid all this is!” said he. Miss Woodhouse must excuse me. He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their
aunt’s, where his regret and vexation and the concern of everybody were
well talked over. She often says, when the letter is first opened, ‘Well, Hetty, now I
think you will be put to it to make out all that checker-work’—don’t
you, ma’am?—And then I tell her, I am sure she would contrive to make
it out herself, if she had nobody to do it for her—every word of it—I
am sure she would pore over it till she had made out every word. “I am not wishing him too much good,” said Marianne at last with a
sigh, “when I wish his secret reflections may be no more unpleasant
than my own. I dare say Mr. Jennings. He would be always coming over. My greatest danger, perhaps, in housekeeping, may be quite the
other way, in doing too much, and being too careless of expense. She would have been glad to know when these
difficulties were to cease, this opposition was to yield,—when Mrs. Elton. There was too much
domestic happiness in his brother’s house; woman wore too amiable a
form in it; Isabella was too much like Emma—differing only in those
striking inferiorities, which always brought the other in brilliancy
before him, for much to have been done, even had his time been
longer.—He had stayed on, however, vigorously, day after day—till this
very morning’s post had conveyed the history of Jane Fairfax.—Then,
with the gladness which must be felt, nay, which he did not scruple to
feel, having never believed Frank Churchill to be at all deserving
Emma, was there so much fond solicitude, so much keen anxiety for her,
that he could stay no longer. Nothing but such
a persuasion could have prevented his putting an end to an engagement,
which, long before the discovery of it laid him open to his mother’s
anger, had been a continual source of disquiet and regret to him. Many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place so
much beloved. Lady Catherine had been rendered so
exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew’s letter, that
Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till
the storm was blown over. William Larkins let me keep a larger quantity than usual this
year. Come, let me see the list of the pitiful fellows
who have been kept aloof by Lydia’s folly.”

“Indeed, you are mistaken. Now,
I can think and speak of it with little emotion. Had my
mother given me some active profession when I was removed at eighteen
from the care of Mr. That very dear part of
Emma, her fancy, received an amusing supply. Willoughby, your own letter; have you any thing to
say about that?”

“Yes, yes, _that_ in particular. Now I am
secure of you for ever.”

Harriet had not surmised her own danger, but the idea of it struck her
forcibly. Put it up, put it up; we will have a good talk about it some
other time, but it will not do now. She played and sang;—and drew in almost every
style; but steadiness had always been wanting; and in nothing had she
approached the degree of excellence which she would have been glad to
command, and ought not to have failed of. On the contrary it
was a relief to her, to be spared the communication of what would give
such affliction to them, and to be saved likewise from hearing that
condemnation of Edward, which would probably flow from the excess of
their partial affection for herself, and which was more than she felt
equal to support. “It must be something particular to take him there at this
time of year.”

“Undoubtedly. Your time has been properly and delicately
spent, if you have been endeavouring for the last four years to bring
about this marriage. it is very hard to think
that she might have been Mr. The
world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his
high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.”

“I should take him, even on _my_ slight acquaintance, to be an
ill-tempered man.”

Wickham only shook his head. Tell me that it is all absolutely
resolved on, that any attempt, that in short concealment, if
concealment be possible, is all that remains.”

These words, which conveyed to Elinor a direct avowal of his love for
her sister, affected her very much. Perhaps in the spring, if I
have plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we may think about
building. Weston in keeping his secret,
than with any other view. John
Knightley, in this short visit to Hartfield, going about every morning
among her old acquaintance with her five children, and talking over
what she had done every evening with her father and sister. Ferrars’s death, which is a
melancholy and shocking extremity?—Is her son determined to submit to
this, and to all the tediousness of the many years of suspense in which
it may involve you, rather than run the risk of her displeasure for a
while by owning the truth?”

“If we could be certain that it would be only for a while! “But what is to be
done about Pemberley?” cried Mrs. Mrs. CHAPTER XIV. They were combined only of anger against herself,
mortification, and deep concern. She liked
him too little to care for his approbation. For my part, I think the less that is said about such
things, the better, the sooner ’tis blown over and forgot. Darcy himself need not disdain,
and respectability which he will probably never reach.” When she thought
of her mother, indeed, her confidence gave way a little; but she would
not allow that any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr. “Oh, she is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! Your superior knowledge of your
sister must make the latter probable. shark is only one
syllable. You will
puff her up with such ideas of her own beauty, and of what she has a
claim to, that, in a little while, nobody within her reach will be good
enough for her. The servant, who saw only that Miss Marianne was taken ill, had sense
enough to call one of the maids, who, with Mrs. and Mrs. “Very serious! She knows
nothing herself, and looks upon Emma as knowing every thing. Depend upon it
he had encouragement.”

It was most convenient to Emma not to make a direct reply to this
assertion; she chose rather to take up her own line of the subject
again. Perry has been with her, as you
probably heard.”

“Yes—I imagined—that is—I did not—”

“He has been used to her in these complaints, and I hope to-morrow
morning will bring us both a more comfortable report. Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley,
and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without
calling her attention. Their father then went to the
library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room. It would surely be much
more rational if conversation instead of dancing made the order of the
day.”

“Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say; but it would not be
near so much like a ball.”

Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards got up and walked about
the room. Knightley? They were, of course, very anxious to see a person on whom so much of
their comfort at Barton must depend; and the elegance of her appearance
was favourable to their wishes. “Now,” said she, “that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly
easy. However,
I do not mean to set up my opinion against yours—and I am sure I shall
not wish for the acquaintance of his wife. Her air was not
conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her
visitors forget their inferior rank. Sir John is as stupid as the
weather.”

The rest of the company soon dropt in. The
evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its
animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and
Elizabeth. Seven years would be
insufficient to make some people acquainted with each other, and seven
days are more than enough for others. Elinor saw, with great uneasiness the low spirits of her friend. He had just
parted from my sister, had seen her leave him in the greatest
affliction; and if he felt obliged, from a fear of offending Mrs. Her ignorance is hourly flattery. She was quick in feeling the little injuries to
Isabella, which Isabella never felt herself. Willoughby or my
sister. I shall only just mention the
circumstance to the others in a common way.”

Mrs. He did speak yesterday—that is, he wrote, and was
refused.”

This was obliged to be repeated before it could be believed; and Mr. We must not make him desperate.”

The tumult of Elizabeth’s mind was allayed by this conversation. It is from my cousin, Mr. He answered
me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying,
that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine’s discernment as to be
certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. She
had no such object for her lingering thoughts to fix on, she left no
creature behind, from whom it would give her a moment’s regret to be
divided for ever, she was pleased to be free herself from the
persecution of Lucy’s friendship, she was grateful for bringing her
sister away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage, and she looked
forward with hope to what a few months of tranquility at Barton might
do towards restoring Marianne’s peace of mind, and confirming her own. She now lost every expectation of pleasure. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
least not to Elizabeth’s wishes, for she was impatient to get home. “Oh! Woodhouse was quite at ease;
and the seeing him so, with the arrival of the little boys and the
philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate, removed the
chief of even Emma’s vexation. no, I
could not endure William Coxe—a pert young lawyer.”

She stopt to blush and laugh at her own relapse, and then resumed a
more serious, more dispiriting cogitation upon what had been, and might
be, and must be. Edward, who, she was sure, had
quite doted upon the worthless hussy, and was now, by all accounts,
almost broken-hearted, at Oxford. Ah! Knightley spoke loud. In every
meeting of the kind Willoughby was included; and the ease and
familiarity which naturally attended these parties were exactly
calculated to give increasing intimacy to his acquaintance with the
Dashwoods, to afford him opportunity of witnessing the excellencies of
Marianne, of marking his animated admiration of her, and of receiving,
in her behaviour to himself, the most pointed assurance of her
affection. Darcy, was in such misery
of shame that she could hardly keep her seat. In spite of the improvements and additions which were
making to the Norland estate, and in spite of its owner having once
been within some thousand pounds of being obliged to sell out at a
loss, nothing gave any symptom of that indigence which he had tried to
infer from it;—no poverty of any kind, except of conversation,
appeared—but there, the deficiency was considerable. Two months must bring it to the proof. His
circumstances, he assured me, and I had no difficulty in believing it,
were exceedingly bad. With this inspiriting notion, her questions increased in number and
meaning; and she particularly led Harriet to talk more of Mr. On _that_ head, therefore, it was not for her to oppose
her mother’s intention of removing into Devonshire. Often as she had wished for and ordered
it, she had never been able to get any thing tolerable. The turn of your countenance I shall never
forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any possible
way that would induce you to accept me.”

“Oh, do not repeat what I then said. When Lady Middleton rose to go away, Mr. And the same may be
said of Mrs. Weston this morning, and
at the end of them he gave me a brief account of what had happened.”

Emma was quite relieved, and could presently say, with a little more
composure,

“_You_ probably have been less surprized than any of us, for you have
had your suspicions.—I have not forgotten that you once tried to give
me a caution.—I wish I had attended to it—but—(with a sinking voice and
a heavy sigh) I seem to have been doomed to blindness.”

For a moment or two nothing was said, and she was unsuspicious of
having excited any particular interest, till she found her arm drawn
within his, and pressed against his heart, and heard him thus saying,
in a tone of great sensibility, speaking low,

“Time, my dearest Emma, time will heal the wound.—Your own excellent
sense—your exertions for your father’s sake—I know you will not allow
yourself—.” Her arm was pressed again, as he added, in a more broken
and subdued accent, “The feelings of the warmest
friendship—Indignation—Abominable scoundrel!”—And in a louder, steadier
tone, he concluded with, “He will soon be gone. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was
enough to provoke him. It was settled that there should be a dance in the evening, and that
every body should be extremely merry all day long. and it
will not be very long, I hope, before that becomes the acknowledgment
of more than your reason.—Fortunate that your affections were not
farther entangled!—I could never, I confess, from your manners, assure
myself as to the degree of what you felt—I could only be certain that
there was a preference—and a preference which I never believed him to
deserve.—He is a disgrace to the name of man.—And is he to be rewarded
with that sweet young woman?—Jane, Jane, you will be a miserable
creature.”

“Mr. You see how continually we are engaged there. Ferrars;
and even, if she might hereafter be induced to forgive her son, his
wife should never be acknowledged as her daughter, nor be permitted to
appear in her presence. To separate Edward and Elinor was
as far from being her object as ever; and she wished to show Mrs. He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. but do not torture me so. I am as
confident of seeing Frank here before the middle of January, as I am of
being here myself: but your good friend there (nodding towards the
upper end of the table) has so few vagaries herself, and has been so
little used to them at Hartfield, that she cannot calculate on their
effects, as I have been long in the practice of doing.”

“I am sorry there should be any thing like doubt in the case,” replied
Emma; “but am disposed to side with you, Mr. Your neighbourhood is increasing,
and you mix more with it. of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Weston joined them, and on hearing what was proposed, gave it
his decided approbation. Elinor was not
prepared for such a question, and having no answer ready, was obliged
to adopt the simple and common expedient, of asking what he meant? Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise
concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth had
such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to
herself. I had imagined you
were consulting me only as to the wording of it.”

Harriet was silent. To Isabella, the relief of such tidings was very great, and they were
scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her father’s account, who was
immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous
constitution allowed; but the alarm that had been raised could not be
appeased so as to admit of any comfort for him while he continued at
Randalls. Your mother must
have been quite a slave to your education.”

Elizabeth could hardly help smiling, as she assured her that had not
been the case. He cannot know what Mr. If _she_ had so misinterpreted his feelings, she had little right to
wonder that _he_, with self-interest to blind him, should have mistaken
hers. Harris, and despatching a messenger to Barton for her mother. Bennet, with more perseverance than
politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always
unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed,--

“Good Lord! They are
ripening fast.”

If Mr. Bennet; and, therefore, instead of
making any answer, she went on as before. that ball!—why did we wait for any thing?—why not seize the
pleasure at once?—How often is happiness destroyed by preparation,
foolish preparation!—You told us it would be so.—Oh! His ideas seemed more moderate—his
feelings warmer. I met the letters in my way this morning, and seeing my
son’s hand, presumed to open it—though it was not directed to me—it was
to Mrs. He was on the move immediately; but coming back,
said,

“I am forgetting that I am not acquainted with her. My
watchfulness has been effectual; and though I should certainly be a more
interesting object to all my acquaintance, were I distractedly in love
with him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance. My
mother desires her very best compliments and regards, and a thousand
thanks, and says you really quite oppress her.”

“We consider our Hartfield pork,” replied Mr. Elton. Collins’s joints of meat were too large for her family. I must
confess it is a recommendation to me. Nay, more, I consider it as
the only form of building in which happiness is attainable, and were I
rich enough I would instantly pull Combe down, and build it up again in
the exact plan of this cottage.”

“With dark narrow stairs and a kitchen that smokes, I suppose,” said
Elinor. Weston agreed to it; but added, that she should be very glad to be
secure of undergoing the anxiety of a first meeting at the time talked
of: “for I cannot depend upon his coming. Mr. With
these rooms I might have now been familiarly acquainted! I am sorry you do not happen to know Mrs. Their first pause was at the Crown Inn, an inconsiderable house, though
the principal one of the sort, where a couple of pair of post-horses
were kept, more for the convenience of the neighbourhood than from any
run on the road; and his companions had not expected to be detained by
any interest excited there; but in passing it they gave the history of
the large room visibly added; it had been built many years ago for a
ball-room, and while the neighbourhood had been in a particularly
populous, dancing state, had been occasionally used as such;—but such
brilliant days had long passed away, and now the highest purpose for
which it was ever wanted was to accommodate a whist club established
among the gentlemen and half-gentlemen of the place. Such an end of the
doleful disappointment of five weeks back! Adieu! Now there is nothing grandmama loves better than sweetbread
and asparagus—so she was rather disappointed, but we agreed we would
not speak of it to any body, for fear of its getting round to dear Miss
Woodhouse, who would be so very much concerned!—Well, this is
brilliant! Miss Woodhouse, how you do forget!”

“My dear Harriet, I perfectly remember the substance of what I said on
the occasion. I hope I
know better now, than to care for Mr. But the question is not, whether it
would be a bad connexion for him, but whether he wishes it; and I think
he does. But I knew not--I was afraid of doing too
much. You shall hear
what she says.”

She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information
of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,
and of their meaning to dine that day in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. They were a family of
the name of Martin, whom Emma well knew by character, as renting a
large farm of Mr. Have all her friends left her?”

“Mrs. Intimate
as you are, you must know how it is to be done.”

“But upon my honour I do _not_. I am very fond of hearing
Miss Bates talk. They had gone, in short—and very
great had been the evident distress and confusion of the lady. Your sister’s lovely person and interesting manners could not but
please me; and her behaviour to me almost from the first, was of a
kind—it is astonishing, when I reflect on what it was, and what _she_
was, that my heart should have been so insensible! “My dear,” said he to his lady, “it is very provoking that we should be
so few. “The rent of this cottage is said to be low; but we have it on very
hard terms, if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is staying
either with them, or with us.”

“They mean no less to be civil and kind to us now,” said Elinor, “by
these frequent invitations, than by those which we received from them a
few weeks ago. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. Elinor
was pleased that he had called; and still more pleased that she had
missed him. A
heavy scene however awaited me, before I could leave Devonshire;—I was
engaged to dine with you on that very day; some apology was therefore
necessary for my breaking this engagement. Bad indeed must the nature of Marianne’s
affliction be, when her mother could talk of fortitude! Or at least, if she
did not bring herself quite to rejoice in Edward’s being fettered to
Lucy, she determined, that had Lucy been more amiable, she _ought_ to
have rejoiced. she is a sweet
creature! He was afraid poor Isabella
would not like it. Dixon or Miss Fairfax, but I cannot help suspecting
either that, after making his proposals to her friend, he had the
misfortune to fall in love with _her_, or that he became conscious of a
little attachment on her side. I shall think you a
great blockhead, Frank, if you bring the aunt without the niece.”

“Oh! And after thinking it all over and over again, he
said, it seemed to him as if, now he had no fortune, and no nothing at
all, it would be quite unkind to keep her on to the engagement, because
it must be for her loss, for he had nothing but two thousand pounds,
and no hope of any thing else; and if he was to go into orders, as he
had some thoughts, he could get nothing but a curacy, and how was they
to live upon that?—He could not bear to think of her doing no better,
and so he begged, if she had the least mind for it, to put an end to
the matter directly, and leave him shift for himself. There is
nothing like dancing, after all. Weston; I am much obliged to you
for reminding me. It is not Willoughby. Never had the
exquisite sight, smell, sensation of nature, tranquil, warm, and
brilliant after a storm, been more attractive to her. His own stomach could
bear nothing rich, and he could never believe other people to be
different from himself. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. Her systems
have all the unfortunate tendency of setting propriety at nought; and a
better acquaintance with the world is what I look forward to as her
greatest possible advantage.”

After a short pause he resumed the conversation by saying,—

“Does your sister make no distinction in her objections against a
second attachment? Colonel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seemed no more adapted by
resemblance of manner to be his friend, than Lady Middleton was to be
his wife, or Mrs. Consider,
she is sitting down—which naturally presents a different—which in short
gives exactly the idea—and the proportions must be preserved, you know. I am perfectly comfortable to-day.”

“You are comfortable because you are under command.”

“Your command?—Yes.”

“Perhaps I intended you to say so, but I meant self-command. And I believe Marianne will be the most
happy with him of the two.”

Elinor was half inclined to ask her reason for thinking so, because
satisfied that none founded on an impartial consideration of their age,
characters, or feelings, could be given;—but her mother must always be
carried away by her imagination on any interesting subject, and
therefore instead of an inquiry, she passed it off with a smile. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with
anxious parade, walk up to her mother’s right hand, and hear her say to
her eldest sister,--

“Ah, Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a
married woman.”

It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment
from which she had been so wholly free at first. Mr. Delighted to hear it
indeed. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday, his wife received a
letter from him: it told them, that on his arrival he had immediately
found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street. Between _them_ it was more the intimacy of sisters. After a short silence the lady first spoke. Frank Churchill comes
as regularly into my mind!”—

All this ran so glibly through her thoughts, that by the time her
father had arranged himself, after the bustle of the Eltons’ departure,
and was ready to speak, she was very tolerably capable of attending. Elton’s activity in her service, and save
herself from being hurried into a delightful situation against her
will. No, never. A very proper compliment!—and then follows the application, which I
think, my dear Harriet, you cannot find much difficulty in
comprehending. Consider how important every moment is in such a case.”

“Let me write for you,” said Jane, “if you dislike the trouble
yourself.”

“I dislike it very much,” he replied; “but it must be done.”

And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house. Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it was ready furnished,
and she might have immediate possession. Weston wants to see you. He dismounted, and giving his horse to his servant, walked back with
them to Barton, whither he was purposely coming to visit them. Bingley does not know Mr. ‘It would
have been beyond comparison,’ she said, ‘the least evil of the two, and
she would be glad to compound _now_ for nothing worse.’ But however,
all that is quite out of the question,—not to be thought of or
mentioned—as to any attachment you know, it never could be: all that is
gone by. I happened to overhear the
gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of
this house the names of his cousin Miss De Bourgh, and of her mother,
Lady Catherine. It was being very deficient.”

“But, my dear papa, you are no friend to matrimony; and therefore why
should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a _bride_? ‘I wish, with all my heart,’ says poor Fanny in her
affectionate way, ‘that we had asked your sisters instead of them.’”

Here he stopped to be thanked; which being done, he went on. Happy, happy Elinor, _you_ cannot have an idea of what I
suffer.”

“Do you call _me_ happy, Marianne? Goddard, what say you to _half_ a glass of wine? Everything
wore a happier aspect. Though Mrs. perfectly. She thinks
so little of her own beauty. Men of family would not be very
fond of connecting themselves with a girl of such obscurity—and most
prudent men would be afraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they
might be involved in, when the mystery of her parentage came to be
revealed. “And do you see her, sir, tolerably often?” asked Isabella in the
plaintive tone which just suited her father. The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them
pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected. Jennings—“Oh! Knightley had been telling him something about
brewing spruce-beer, and he wanted to put it down; but when he took out
his pencil, there was so little lead that he soon cut it all away, and
it would not do, so you lent him another, and this was left upon the
table as good for nothing. I leave you to your own reflections.”

“Can you trust me with such flatterers?—Does my vain spirit ever tell
me I am wrong?”

“Not your vain spirit, but your serious spirit.—If one leads you wrong,
I am sure the other tells you of it.”

“I do own myself to have been completely mistaken in Mr. John
Dashwood; and these were effects that laid open the probability of
greater. “Well, Miss Woodhouse!” cried Harriet, coming eagerly into the room—“is
not this the oddest news that ever was?”

“What news do you mean?” replied Emma, unable to guess, by look or
voice, whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint. She saw
instantly that her cousin’s manners were not altered by his marriage:
his formal civility was just what it had been; and he detained her some
minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her
family. He seemed not merely happy with her, but proud. Bingley will dance with you at the next
ball.”

“Oh,” said Lydia, stoutly, “I am not afraid; for though I _am_ the
youngest, I’m the tallest.”

The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would
return Mr. But with such
a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no
chance of it.”

“I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in
Meryton?”

“Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.”

“That is capital,” added her sister; and they both laughed heartily. Though his eyes had been long opened,
even before his acquaintance with Elinor began, to her ignorance and a
want of liberality in some of her opinions—they had been equally
imputed, by him, to her want of education; and till her last letter
reached him, he had always believed her to be a well-disposed,
good-hearted girl, and thoroughly attached to himself. Elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward, was on the point
of concluding it, when another gentleman presented himself at her side. “He has been wanting to come to us,” continued Mr. Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a conversation, and
therefore exerted herself to ask Mr. It need not detain us long. Mrs. And so she began inquiring after her directly, saying, ‘I
know you cannot have heard from Jane lately, because it is not her time
for writing;’ and when I immediately said, ‘But indeed we have, we had
a letter this very morning,’ I do not know that I ever saw any body
more surprized. Mr. That it
was time for every body to go, concluded the subject; and with a short
final arrangement for the next day’s scheme, they parted. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most
natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. I shall press you no more.”

The rest of the party were now returning, and all were soon collected. The idea of the olive branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I
think it is well expressed.”

To Catherine and Lydia neither the letter nor its writer were in any
degree interesting. Jennings, though regretting that she had not been five minutes
earlier, was satisfied with the compromise; and Elinor, as she
swallowed the chief of it, reflected, that though its effects on a
colicky gout were, at present, of little importance to her, its healing
powers, on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably tried on herself
as on her sister. The private
balls at the park then began; and parties on the water were made and
accomplished as often as a showery October would allow. Willoughby’s groom; and that she had by that method been informed that
they had gone to Allenham, and spent a considerable time there in
walking about the garden and going all over the house. “If we make haste,” said Lydia, as they walked along, “perhaps we may
see something of Captain Carter, before he goes.”

In Meryton they parted: the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one
of the officers’ wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing
field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing
over puddles, with impatient activity, and finding herself at last
within view of the house, with weary ancles, dirty stockings, and a face
glowing with the warmth of exercise. But fetch them both. She knows now what gentlemen
are; and nothing but a gentleman in education and manner has any chance
with Harriet.”

“Nonsense, errant nonsense, as ever was talked!” cried Mr. Dashwood’s looks and spirits proved her to be, as she repeatedly
declared herself, one of the happiest women in the world. yes, I
must be there; I could not refuse; and I will keep as much awake as I
can; but I would rather be at home, looking over William Larkins’s
week’s account; much rather, I confess.—Pleasure in seeing dancing!—not
I, indeed—I never look at it—I do not know who does.—Fine dancing, I
believe, like virtue, must be its own reward. Weston, do let me know what has happened.”

“No, no,”—he gravely replied.—“Don’t ask me. Who
are your uncles and aunts? It was thus imparted to her, as
soon as any opportunity of private conference between them occurred. He found her
as handsome as she had been last year; as good-natured, and as
unaffected, though not quite so chatty. His professions and his
proposals did him no service. And I must say this: that you owe
no particular gratitude to him, nor attention to his wishes; for we
very well know that if he could, he would have left almost everything
in the world to _them_.”

This argument was irresistible. The chief of every day was spent by
him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time
to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed. There was a bustle on her approach; a good deal of moving and talking. Mr. Bennet; “and
nothing can clear Mr. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. Elizabeth had frequently
united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine
and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother’s indulgence,
what chance could there be of improvement? He was a tall,
heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. Jennings, “and how did you travel?”

“Not in the stage, I assure you,” replied Miss Steele, with quick
exultation; “we came post all the way, and had a very smart beau to
attend us. Perhaps she might have
passed over more had his manners been flattering to Isabella’s sister,
but they were only those of a calmly kind brother and friend, without
praise and without blindness; but hardly any degree of personal
compliment could have made her regardless of that greatest fault of all
in her eyes which he sometimes fell into, the want of respectful
forbearance towards her father. Martin was so very kind as to send
Mrs. The morning of the interesting day arrived, and Mrs. _Their_ situation was awkward enough; but
_hers_ she thought was still worse. In her letters
I shall be at dear Highbury again.”

A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest “Good-bye,” closed
the speech, and the door had soon shut out Frank Churchill. But it is very
remarkable that she should always hear Jane better than she does me. and yet how many things have
happened!”

“A great many indeed,” said her companion, with a sigh. Well, it is the oddest thing to
me, that a man should use such a pretty girl so ill! It had come
with a fare from London; and as he thought the circumstance of a
gentleman and lady’s removing from one carriage into another might be
remarked, he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. Miss Fairfax knows it is
not from the Campbells, or they would have been guessed at first. But I ought
to have gone before. Weston’s son—but lay out half a guinea at Ford’s, and your
popularity will stand upon your own virtues.”

They went in; and while the sleek, well-tied parcels of “Men’s Beavers”
and “York Tan” were bringing down and displaying on the counter, he
said—“But I beg your pardon, Miss Woodhouse, you were speaking to me,
you were saying something at the very moment of this burst of my _amor_
_patriae_. “Oh! They recommended the army. What would you advise me to do in such a
case, Miss Dashwood? “You are mistaken, Elinor,” said she warmly, “in supposing I know very
little of Willoughby. She then took a large house in Edward Street,
     and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters
as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity to discover the
name of your admirer. You alluded to something else. Sometimes she could believe Willoughby to be as
unfortunate and as innocent as herself, and at others, lost every
consolation in the impossibility of acquitting him. and she was sorry to find from Mrs. Randalls is such a distance. What Wickham had said of the living
was fresh in her memory; and as she recalled his very words, it was
impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the
other, and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did
not err. Do not distress me by the idea. I have no patience with him. I
have often known it done myself.”

“Have you indeed, sir?—Bless me! Such a beginning as this cannot be followed by
any thing. He had more than the ordinary triumph of accepted love to swell
his heart, and raise his spirits. She had
an unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a man, for
she hardly knew what indisposition was; and if he did not invent
illnesses for her, she could make no figure in a message. This was broken by Willoughby, who said with a faint
smile, “It is folly to linger in this manner. It is every way horrible!”

Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence. John Knightley coolly. Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. By a most fortunate chance his
leaving Highbury had been delayed so as to bring him to her assistance
at this critical moment. Edward was allowed to retain the
privilege of first comer, and Colonel Brandon therefore walked every
night to his old quarters at the Park; from whence he usually returned
in the morning, early enough to interrupt the lovers’ first tête-à-tête
before breakfast. She will tell you any thing if you
ask. Ferrars in the carriage with her?”

“Yes, ma’am, I just see him leaning back in it, but he did not look
up;—he never was a gentleman much for talking.”

Elinor’s heart could easily account for his not putting himself
forward; and Mrs. no wonder she has been looking so bad and so cast
down this last week or two, for this matter I suppose has been hanging
over her head as long as that. There was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out
as likely to give any news of him. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it--unless it is,
for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to
think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with
ignorance.”

“Not that I _shall_, though,” she added to herself, and she finished the
letter; “and, my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable
manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it
out.”

Jane’s delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to
Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of
it:--till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any
satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante. Miss Bingley warmly
resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her
brother for talking such nonsense. In a hurried
manner, he replied in the affirmative. Collins, for she vows she will
not have him; and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and
not have _her_.”

Mr. “Oh, my dear Mr. I, you may well believe, could talk
of nothing but my child;—he could not conceal his distress; I saw that
it equalled my own, and he perhaps, thinking that mere friendship, as
the world now goes, would not justify so warm a sympathy—or rather, not
thinking at all, I suppose—giving way to irresistible feelings, made me
acquainted with his earnest, tender, constant, affection for Marianne. He looked at them slightly, without seeming to know who they
were, and merely nodded to Mrs. Morris immediately; that he is
to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be
in the house by the end of next week.”

“What is his name?”

“Bingley.”

“Is he married or single?”

“Oh, single, my dear, to be sure! “That will do,” said he, when it was finished, thinking aloud—“you have
sung quite enough for one evening—now be quiet.”

Another song, however, was soon begged for. If _we_ exert ourselves, I think we shall
not be long in want of allies. A little upstart,
vulgar being, with her Mr. Have you forgot the last evening of our being
together at Barton? But do not imagine
that he is always here so often. of Mr. Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily
attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause
to repine.”

“Obstinate, headstrong girl! Palmer and all
his relations were at the devil, it would not have turned me from the
door. Let me take it
in the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.”

Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her
feelings appear what they were not. Elton was in continual raptures, and defended it through every
criticism. A room or two can easily be added; and if my friends
find no difficulty in travelling so far to see me, I am sure I will
find none in accommodating them.”

She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr. Wickham was therefore
at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him,
though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told,
the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Mr. “Perhaps,” continued Elinor, “if I should happen to cut out, I may be
of some use to Miss Lucy Steele, in rolling her papers for her; and
there is so much still to be done to the basket, that it must be
impossible I think for her labour singly, to finish it this evening. I had no hope of interfering with
success; and sometimes I thought your sister’s influence might yet
reclaim him. With an income quite sufficient to their wants thus secured to them,
they had nothing to wait for after Edward was in possession of the
living, but the readiness of the house, to which Colonel Brandon, with
an eager desire for the accommodation of Elinor, was making
considerable improvements; and after waiting some time for their
completion, after experiencing, as usual, a thousand disappointments
and delays from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen, Elinor,
as usual, broke through the first positive resolution of not marrying
till every thing was ready, and the ceremony took place in Barton
church early in the autumn. To take three thousand pounds from the fortune
of their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the most
dreadful degree. I had hoped that her regard for me would support
her under any difficulty, and for some time it did; but at last the
misery of her situation, for she experienced great unkindness, overcame
all her resolution, and though she had promised me that nothing—but how
blindly I relate! He
understood what would be welcome; he could be sure of little else. She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no
other reply to Elizabeth’s salutation than a slight inclination of the
head, and sat down without saying a word. and what can _he_ have to say?”

“Something very much to the purpose, of course. On the contrary, every
friend must be made still more her friend by them. Elton, than it was removed. Darcy appeared again, when,
looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. At one time she had almost
resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness
of the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that
Mr. You
would not come in and sit with us in this comfortable way, if you were
married.”

Mr. But I don’t think mine would be, to make one son
independent, because another had plagued me.”

Marianne got up and walked about the room. Darcy has no defect. “She had set out from Mrs. I have seen a great many lists of her drawing-up at various times
of books that she meant to read regularly through—and very good lists
they were—very well chosen, and very neatly arranged—sometimes
alphabetically, and sometimes by some other rule. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece’s
beginning the subject. How it could occur a second time,
therefore, was very odd! Goddard’s door, which I did the very last thing
before I returned to dress, I was told that Miss Smith was not better,
by no means better, rather worse. I wish you may receive this in time to
come here to-night, but I will not depend on it. I will move a
little farther off.”

“I certainly do forget to think of _her_,” said Emma, “as having ever
been any thing but my friend and my dearest friend.”

He looked as if he fully understood and honoured such a sentiment. The invitation
was refused, and by a verbal message. On the
gentlemen’s appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with
tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any
symptom of resentment, or any unnecessary complaisance. I
thought I heard a carriage last night, while we were drinking our tea,
but it never entered my head that it could be them. I’d rather you
would.”

Emma was not sorry to be pressed. _That_ is strange! She was
to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. Nature gave you understanding:—Miss Taylor
gave you principles. His father would not own himself
uneasy, and laughed at her fears; but she could not be cured of wishing
that he would part with his black mare. Goddard, and notice of there being such a set of people
in the neighbourhood to Mr. Your mother will never see you
again if you do _not_ marry Mr. I heard it from the servant. I shall do something to expose myself.”

“That may be—but not by sketches in Swisserland. I never knew days fly
so fast. I have formed my plan,
and am determined to enter on a course of serious study. Do you think it is a good one? Mr. “There is nothing to be compared to it. Knightley began to suspect him of some inclination to trifle with
Jane Fairfax. If
your abhorrence of _me_ should make _my_ assertions valueless, you
cannot be prevented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and
that there may be the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour
to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the
course of the morning. Surprise was the least
of all her feelings on this development. They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Now was the time for Mr. The wind roared round the house, and the
rain beat against the windows; but Elinor, all happiness within,
regarded it not. Weston’s drawing-room;—Mr. And now do, when you get to town, find them out,
wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ them
marry. Emma had not been thinking of him, she had
forgotten to think of him—but she was very glad to see him. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a
proper situation for her daughter; and, without knowing or considering
what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and
importance. Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not
attempted to deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his
attachment had for a moment excited. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless
precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.”

“I daresay you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you
would be gone with such celerity. Stop me, whilst you can.”

“You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?”

“Yes, in conjunction with his friend.”

“I cannot believe it. Collins in time.”

The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a
secret. “I knew,” said he, “that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was
necessary. But some of those little
attentions and encouragements which ladies can so easily give will fix
him, in spite of himself. But on seeing them together, she became perfectly satisfied. Although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings, Mr. here it comes. The lady would probably have
passed without suspicion, had he not convinced Miss Dashwood that what
concerned her ought not to escape his lips. If he had been so very
agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. It will not do to _invite_ five couple. “What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment! Mr. Perry said, so many
years ago, when I had the measles? you are not serious now. And now, let me
talk to you of something else. When Edward’s unhappy match takes
place, depend upon it his mother will feel as much as if she had never
discarded him; and, therefore every circumstance that may accelerate
that dreadful event, must be concealed from her as much as possible. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before it
rained hard. “Yes,” cried he in the same eager tone, “with all and every thing
belonging to it;—in no one convenience or inconvenience about it,
should the least variation be perceptible. But the Martins occupied
her thoughts a good deal; she had spent two very happy months with
them, and now loved to talk of the pleasures of her visit, and describe
the many comforts and wonders of the place. But as it
was, such a notion had scarcely ever entered her head, except by Mrs. Bennet; “and it is happy for you
that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. “Exert yourself, dear Marianne,” she cried, “if you would not kill
yourself and all who love you. When Mrs. “No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to
rain; and then you must stay all night.”

“That would be a good scheme,” said Elizabeth, “if you were sure that
they would not offer to send her home.”

“Oh, but the gentlemen will have Mr. She could not bear that her master should not be able to have
another apple-tart this spring. I know what your drawings are. I wish you had been there. And I
hope you may have as good luck yourself soon,—but perhaps you may have
a friend in the corner already.”

Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more nice in
proclaiming his suspicions of her regard for Edward, than he had been
with respect to Marianne; indeed it was rather his favourite joke of
the two, as being somewhat newer and more conjectural; and since
Edward’s visit, they had never dined together without his drinking to
her best affections with so much significancy and so many nods and
winks, as to excite general attention. One
shoulder of mutton, you know, drives another down. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went
along, and how often especially Miss De Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,
which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened
almost every day. Can you, yourself, Lizzie, so wholly give him up, as to believe
him capable of it?”

“Not perhaps of neglecting his own interest. There is
one point on which I want your advice. “He is, indeed: but considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we
cannot wonder at his complaisance; for who would object to such a
partner?”

Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that
you have actually seen Pemberley.”

She replied in the affirmative. Elton and his bride” was in
every body’s mouth, and Frank Churchill was forgotten. Bennet half opened the door and called out,--

“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.”

Elizabeth was forced to go. Dashwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing him; for his
coming to Barton was, in her opinion, of all things the most natural. You know nothing of drawing. They
are all remarkably clever; and they have so many pretty ways. When
she took in her history, indeed, her situation, as well as her beauty;
when she considered what all this elegance was destined to, what she
was going to sink from, how she was going to live, it seemed impossible
to feel any thing but compassion and respect; especially, if to every
well-known particular entitling her to interest, were added the highly
probable circumstance of an attachment to Mr. Perhaps this concealment, this disguise, was beneath me. Whatever the
truth of it might be, and far as Elinor was from feeling thorough
contentment about it, yet while she saw Marianne in spirits, she could
not be very uncomfortable herself. Gardiner, after
general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told her
that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr. They had been arrived only a few
minutes, and Mr. It had not been very great; he had lost every point;
but when Mrs. What say you both to
our collecting the same party, and exploring to Box Hill again, while
the fine weather lasts?—It must be the same party, you know, quite the
same party, not _one_ exception.”

Soon after this Miss Bates came in, and Emma could not help being
diverted by the perplexity of her first answer to herself, resulting,
she supposed, from doubt of what might be said, and impatience to say
every thing. It was quite out of the benevolence of her heart, that
she had asked these young women to her house; merely because she
thought they deserved some attention, were harmless, well-behaved
girls, and would be pleasant companions; for otherwise we both wished
very much to have invited you and Marianne to be with us, while your
kind friend there, was attending her daughter. Her mind returned to Mrs. Some portion of respect for herself, however, in spite of
all these demerits—some concern for her own appearance, and a strong
sense of justice by Harriet—(there would be no need of _compassion_ to
the girl who believed herself loved by Mr. Willoughby is unfathomable! Collins
instead!--her liveliness had been never worse timed. Cole does not want to be wiser or
wittier than his neighbours.”

“In that respect how unlike dear Mrs. It is impossible that he should still love
me.”

After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two
gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the
brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious
water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. Mr. He shall not be in love with me, if I
can prevent it.”

“Elizabeth, you are not serious now.”

“I beg your pardon. What a good joke it will be! She will grow just
refined enough to be uncomfortable with those among whom birth and
circumstances have placed her home. Colonel Brandon must be the man; and no
civility shall be wanting on my part to make him pleased with you and
your family. Weston’s suspicions, to which the sweet sounds of the united
voices gave only momentary interruptions. Knightley!—I could not have believed
it. The first
question on her side, which led to farther particulars, was,—

“How long has this been known to you, Elinor? Something must be
done for them whenever they leave Norland and settle in a new home.”

“Well, then, _let_ something be done for them; but _that_ something
need not be three thousand pounds. I am
perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had
any design of engaging my affection. She performed her promise of being discreet, to admiration.—She
attended to all that Mrs. Gray’s shop, as in her own bedroom. They entered the woods, and, bidding adieu to the river for a while,
ascended some of the higher grounds; whence, in spots where the opening
of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of
the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods
overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream. Is not he a
charming man? In this quiet way the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away. Elton were together. Collins’s long speeches would allow,
everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as
they entered the house, he earnestly entreated her to name the day that
was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must
be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with
his happiness. His affection was proved to
have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any
could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. Knightley had once told her it was
because she saw in her the really accomplished young woman, which she
wanted to be thought herself; and though the accusation had been
eagerly refuted at the time, there were moments of self-examination in
which her conscience could not quite acquit her. I always make a point of reading Jane’s letters through
to myself first, before I read them aloud to my mother, you know, for
fear of there being any thing in them to distress her. It was her own choice to give the time of their absence to
Highbury; to spend, perhaps, her last months of perfect liberty with
those kind relations to whom she was so very dear: and the Campbells,
whatever might be their motive or motives, whether single, or double,
or treble, gave the arrangement their ready sanction, and said, that
they depended more on a few months spent in her native air, for the
recovery of her health, than on any thing else. “What an excellent device,” said he, “the use of a sheepskin for
carriages. His affection was all her own. You and Mr. and Mrs. [Illustration:

“I am sure she did not listen.”
]




CHAPTER LII. An egg
boiled very soft is not unwholesome. She
complained bitterly of all this to her husband. Martin talks
of taking a boy another year.”

“I wish you may not get into a scrape, Harriet, whenever he does
marry;—I mean, as to being acquainted with his wife—for though his
sisters, from a superior education, are not to be altogether objected
to, it does not follow that he might marry any body at all fit for you
to notice. She was disgustingly, was suspiciously
reserved. Knightley presently, “I have a piece of news for you. They would feel that
they could trust him; that the nephew who had done rightly by his
father, would do rightly by them; for they know, as well as he does, as
well as all the world must know, that he ought to pay this visit to his
father; and while meanly exerting their power to delay it, are in their
hearts not thinking the better of him for submitting to their whims. I think, Emma, I shall try and persuade her to
stay longer with us. As to her illness, all
nothing of course. I pity _her_. Weston smiling;
“remember that I am here.—Mr. They had
nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not,
it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market town
where the family did not visit. On the subject of the first of the two circumstances, she did, after a
little reflection, venture the following question. It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers
as capable as any other woman’s of superior execution.”

Darcy smiled and said, “You are perfectly right. A young man,
such as you describe Mr. “Well, my dear, ’tis a true saying about an ill-wind, for it will be
all the better for Colonel Brandon. Churchill is not much in my good graces, as you may suspect—but
this is quite between ourselves. The Middletons
were to follow in about a week. Ferrars _did_ come to see them, and always treated them
with the make-believe of decent affection, they were never insulted by
her real favour and preference. I was so vexed to see him stand
up with her; but, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody
can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going
down the dance. I could never hope to
equal my own doings at Randalls. Weston was to call in the evening, and she
must return it by him. She was engaged one day, as she walked, in re-perusing Jane’s last
letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not
written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little, but every
five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. And even now, I cannot
comprehend on what motive she acted, or what fancied advantage it could
be to her, to be fettered to a man for whom she had not the smallest
regard, and who had only two thousand pounds in the world. If you
prefer Mr. Thank Heaven! At the
same time, nobody could wonder if Mr. She had gained her point, and had time
to consider of it. But unwelcome as such a task must be, it was necessary to
be done, and Elinor therefore hastened to perform it. Never mind Miss
Lizzy’s hair.”

“We will be down as soon as we can,” said Jane; “but I dare say Kitty is
forwarder than either of us, for she went upstairs half an hour ago.”

“Oh! The circumstance was told him at Hartfield; for the moment,
he was silent; but Emma heard him almost immediately afterwards say to
himself, over a newspaper he held in his hand, “Hum! Oh, what would _he_ say to that!”

Elinor advised her to lie down again, and for a moment she did so; but
no attitude could give her ease; and in restless pain of mind and body
she moved from one posture to another, till growing more and more
hysterical, her sister could with difficulty keep her on the bed at
all, and for some time was fearful of being constrained to call for
assistance. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants
were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his
guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to
shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Knightley’s high superiority of character. They were more disturbed,
more unequal, than she had often seen them. She was born to overcome an
affection formed so late in life as at seventeen, and with no sentiment
superior to strong esteem and lively friendship, voluntarily to give
her hand to another!—and _that_ other, a man who had suffered no less
than herself under the event of a former attachment, whom, two years
before, she had considered too old to be married,—and who still sought
the constitutional safeguard of a flannel waistcoat! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not
an excellent library.”

No one made any reply. Darcy, he stopped, with a bow of superior courtesy, to compliment him on
his dancing and his partner. Few
people of common prudence will do _that_ and whatever she saves, she
will be able to dispose of.”

“And do you not think it more likely that she should leave it to her
daughters, than to us?”

“Her daughters are both exceedingly well married, and therefore I
cannot perceive the necessity of her remembering them farther. Collins must excuse
me. Collins thus
addressed her,--

“When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I
shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given
me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I
know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the
first application, and, perhaps, you have even now said as much to
encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the
female character.”

“Really, Mr. By all that I have
ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
quality or other, real or imaginary. Her manners were by no means so elegant as her sister’s,
but they were much more prepossessing. Has there been any inconsistency on his side to
create alarm? Knightley too, to
take care of her, I cannot wish to prevent it, provided the weather be
what it ought, neither damp, nor cold, nor windy.” Then turning to Mrs. Harry was vastly pleased. Jennings, who called on her again the next day with her
congratulations, that she had never seen him in such spirits before in
her life. Elton!—‘Jane Fairfax and Jane Fairfax.’ Heavens! Thank heaven! [Illustration]

When the ladies removed after dinner Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and
seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the drawing-room,
where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of
pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were
during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. In this age of literature, such collections on a very grand scale are
not uncommon. Collins readily assented, and a book
was produced; but on beholding it (for everything announced it to be
from a circulating library) he started back, and, begging pardon,
protested that he never read novels. She was obliged to stop and think. Collins, “were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I
should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an
air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly
compatible with the profession of a clergyman. Ten minutes
would have been all that was necessary, perhaps all that was proper;
and I had told my father I should certainly be at home before him—but
there was no getting away, no pause; and, to my utter astonishment, I
found, when he (finding me nowhere else) joined me there at last, that
I had been actually sitting with them very nearly three-quarters of an
hour. Each faulty
propensity in leading him to evil, had led him likewise to punishment. “I thought you were both in Devonshire,” said he. It was not closed, however, it still remained
ajar; but by engaging the housekeeper in incessant conversation, she
hoped to make it practicable for him to chuse his own subject in the
adjoining room. Isabella cannot bear to stay behind her
husband.”

This was too true for contradiction. He wishes his boys to be active and hardy; and if they
misbehave, can give them a sharp word now and then; but he is an
affectionate father—certainly Mr. I have been making discoveries and forming plans, just like
yourself, and I must tell them while the idea is fresh. When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,
the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. It is what everybody says. At the park she
laughed at the colonel, and in the cottage at Marianne. I am sorry for _her_. Knightley must marry no one but herself! Colonel Brandon, unfortunately for himself, had no such
encouragement to think only of Marianne, and in conversing with Elinor
he found the greatest consolation for the indifference of her sister. He acquiesced in all her decisions, caught all her
enthusiasm; and long before his visit concluded, they conversed with
the familiarity of a long-established acquaintance. He would not ask Harriet to dance
if it were possible to be avoided: she was sure he would not—and she
was expecting him every moment to escape into the card-room. He
drew a chair near her. I have heard him
say that he could listen to her for ever. and to see dear Wickham too! What will it answer? Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed. He had made his fortune, bought his house, and obtained
his wife; and was beginning a new period of existence, with every
probability of greater happiness than in any yet passed through. Palmer to her husband, who just then entered
the room—“you must help me to persuade the Miss Dashwoods to go to town
this winter.”

Her love made no answer; and after slightly bowing to the ladies, began
complaining of the weather. A few
minutes more of silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composure. This to _me_! This room was my late
master’s favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to
be then. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving
the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. mama, how spiritless, how tame was
Edward’s manner in reading to us last night! Knightley soon
afterwards made to “What does Weston think of the weather; shall we
have rain?” convinced her that he had nothing more to say or surmise
about Hartfield. The evening is closing in, and grandmama will be looking
for us. As a clergyman,
     moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing
     of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and on
     these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures of
     good-will are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my
     being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly
     overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered
     olive branch. Jennings’s suggestion; and she could not help believing herself the
nicest observer of the two;—she watched his eyes, while Mrs. But “she could never
get acquainted with her: she did not know how it was, but there was
such coldness and reserve—such apparent indifference whether she
pleased or not—and then, her aunt was such an eternal talker!—and she
was made such a fuss with by every body!—and it had been always
imagined that they were to be so intimate—because their ages were the
same, every body had supposed they must be so fond of each other.”
These were her reasons—she had no better. You are
too bountiful! The idea
lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the
turning past, he was immediately before them. Weston, and so much in love with Miss Fairfax, and she was so
happy herself, that there was no being severe; and could he have
entered the room, she must have shaken hands with him as heartily as
ever. No positive engagement
indeed! “Upon my soul,” said he, “I do not know much about him as to all
_that_. Mrs. The
style of the letter was much above her expectation. The part which I acted is
now to be explained. “I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!” cried
Jane. “It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane,” said she. Marianne, few as had been her hours of comfort in London, and eager as
she had long been to quit it, could not, when it came to the point, bid
adieu to the house in which she had for the last time enjoyed those
hopes, and that confidence, in Willoughby, which were now extinguished
for ever, without great pain. The evening was quiet and conversable, as Mr. _Her_ mind
was less difficult to develope. Knightley, is not she?”

“I have not a fault to find with her person,” he replied. And, above all things, keep Mr. His answer was not very
encouraging. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by
your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide,
though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education
and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like
yourself;” and with a low bow he left her to attack Mr. It seemed as if her eyes were
suddenly opened, and she were enabled to see that Mr. Lively as he
was, it seemed a liveliness that did not satisfy himself; but what
decided her belief on the subject, was his staying only a quarter of an
hour, and hurrying away to make other calls in Highbury. One seems so forlorn without them.”

“This is the consequence, you see, madam, of marrying a daughter,” said
Elizabeth. _That_ is all to be forgot. Bennet protested against any
description of finery. It would be a great pleasure to know Robert Martin. You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned brought on a
headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening that, added to
her unwillingness to see Mr. However, I dare say we should have seen a great deal of him
in Somersetshire, if it had not happened very unluckily that we should
never have been in the country together. So far from having
long understood you, I have been in a most complete error with respect
to your views, till this moment. “When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma’am?” was an inquiry which
sprung from the impatience of her mind to have something going on. Perry had told somebody, and was
extremely happy about it. very unaccountable! “I do not attempt to deny,” said she, “that I think very highly of
him—that I greatly esteem, that I like him.”

Marianne here burst forth with indignation—

“Esteem him! A three weeks’ residence at Delaford, where, in his evening hours at
least, he had little to do but to calculate the disproportion between
thirty-six and seventeen, brought him to Barton in a temper of mind
which needed all the improvement in Marianne’s looks, all the kindness
of her welcome, and all the encouragement of her mother’s language, to
make it cheerful. Ferrars has a noble spirit. She knew I had no regard for her when we
married. He would either have gloried in the achievement, or been
ashamed of it. The beginning contained an account of all their
little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded;
but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident
agitation, gave more important intelligence. Palmer rose also, laid down
the newspaper, stretched himself and looked at them all around. CHAPTER XII. Dashwood should advance anything; and they were neither of them quite
enough in love to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a-year
would supply them with the comforts of life. I am losing all my
bitterness against spoilt children, my dearest Emma. I depend on you for that.’” To these
high-flown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of
distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she
saw nothing in it really to lament: it was not to be supposed that their
absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. It was a sweet view—sweet to the eye and the mind. For the truth of everything here
related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Colonel
Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and
still more as one of the executors of my father’s will, has been
unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions. how I laughed! Wickham. She would not be in a hurry to find fault,
but she suspected that there was no elegance;—ease, but not elegance.—
She was almost sure that for a young woman, a stranger, a bride, there
was too much ease. My mother means well;
but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she
says. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of
thinking. Emma thanked him, but could not allow of his disappointing his friend
on their account; her father was sure of his rubber. and Mrs. It had given him a
disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town;
and, quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about
a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge; where he
could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by
business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. That lady, I suppose, is your
mother?”

Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was. South End is prohibited, if you please. Palmer’s eye was now caught by the
drawings which hung round the room. This made a difficulty. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London. Elton, this is the most extraordinary conduct! And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater
beauty. I promised
them so faithfully! Weston is such a
good-humoured, pleasant, excellent man, that he thoroughly deserves a
good wife;—and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us for
ever, and bear all my odd humours, when she might have a house of her
own?”

“A house of her own!—But where is the advantage of a house of her own? so tall! Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and
Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew
the least, and who, she observed to Mrs. Elton, “as I got near the house,
and he told me I should not find his master at home, but I did not
believe him.—William seemed rather out of humour. No sooner did he appear, than Elizabeth wisely
resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;--a resolution the more
necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she
saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour
when he first came into the room. Weston, I dare say, has been telling you exactly how the matter
stands?”

“Yes—it seems to depend upon nothing but the ill-humour of Mrs. Knightley in her way; or, perhaps, he might come in while
she were paying her visit. Jane now came up. Have not you always hated him?”

How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more
reasonable, her expressions more moderate! Bragge, but in felicity and splendour it
fell short only of them: it was with a cousin of Mrs. I have entered many a
shop to avoid your sight, as the carriage drove by. At
first sight, his address is certainly not striking; and his person can
hardly be called handsome, till the expression of his eyes, which are
uncommonly good, and the general sweetness of his countenance, is
perceived. Jane will be only four miles from Maple Grove.”

“Mrs. Mrs. He looked rather distressed as he added, that he had been staying with
some friends near Plymouth. Do
not think yourself excused by any weakness, any natural defect of
understanding on her side, in the wanton cruelty so evident on yours. She admired him for contriving
it, though not able to give him much credit for the manner in which it
was announced. The agony of grief which
overpowered them at first, was voluntarily renewed, was sought for, was
created again and again. They joined company and
proceeded together. Mr. Collins, too! There was no arguing upon such a
project. As to what
restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a
dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I know
nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. Miss Bates stood in the very worst predicament in the world for having
much of the public favour; and she had no intellectual superiority to
make atonement to herself, or frighten those who might hate her into
outward respect. Cole but yesterday, and he quite agreed with me; only he is so
particularly fond of music that he could not help indulging himself in
the purchase, hoping that some of our good neighbours might be so
obliging occasionally to put it to a better use than we can; and that
really is the reason why the instrument was bought—or else I am sure we
ought to be ashamed of it.—We are in great hopes that Miss Woodhouse
may be prevailed with to try it this evening.”

Miss Woodhouse made the proper acquiescence; and finding that nothing
more was to be entrapped from any communication of Mrs. But I am particularly
attached to these young men; and know them to be so much attached to me! “Marianne is not well,” said she. you will be
glad of a little company to sit with you. You had made your own choice. The Miss Dashwoods were
young, pretty, and unaffected. Bennet was stirring the fire. But the gloom of Lydia’s prospect was shortly cleared away; for she
received an invitation from Mrs. Darcy
approaching them, and at no great distance. After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton, to inquire if Mr. Such
doings discomposed Mr. But this he declined, as
he was dirty and wet. I was
ready to have gone with her, but this will do just as well. Her resistance had not injured
her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some
complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley,--

“I can guess the subject of your reverie.”

“I should imagine not.”

“You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many
evenings in this manner,--in such society; and, indeed, I am quite of
your opinion. Reynolds could interest her on no other point. I remember saying to myself, ‘Even Emma, with
all her partiality for Harriet, will think this a good match.’”

“I cannot help wondering at your knowing so little of Emma as to say
any such thing. He may, at times, be able to do a great deal more than he can
at others.”

“There is one thing, Emma, which a man can always do, if he chuses, and
that is, his duty; not by manoeuvring and finessing, but by vigour and
resolution. Respect,
esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views of
domestic happiness were overthrown. She was very far from wishing to dwell on her own feelings, or to
represent herself as suffering much, any otherwise than as the
self-command she had practised since her first knowledge of Edward’s
engagement, might suggest a hint of what was practicable to Marianne. How much I shall have to tell!”

Elizabeth privately added, “And how much I shall have to conceal!”

Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and
within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Collins you
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
that your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this point it will be
as well to be silent. As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was comfortable and compact;
but as a cottage it was defective, for the building was regular, the
roof was tiled, the window shutters were not painted green, nor were
the walls covered with honeysuckles. She had even
learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted her,
an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. Collins’s making two offers
of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now
accepted. I was angry, perhaps, at first, but my anger soon began to
take a proper direction.”

“I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me when we met at
Pemberley. Maple Grove has given me a thorough disgust to
people of that sort; for there is a family in that neighbourhood who
are such an annoyance to my brother and sister from the airs they give
themselves! Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth,
that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in
marriage. and Mrs. Elton, and when Mrs. How is she to-day? That was just like Lucy. You will excuse her not coming
to you—she is not able—she is gone into her own room—I want her to lie
down upon the bed. Proportions, fore-shortening.—Oh no! I am excessively attentive to all those
things. Knightley ‘no;’ and Miss Bates and I that he is just the
happy medium. Cole has servants to send. “She would rather not
be in his company more than she could help. Isabella stept in after her father; John Knightley, forgetting that he
did not belong to their party, stept in after his wife very naturally;
so that Emma found, on being escorted and followed into the second
carriage by Mr. It was some minutes before she could
go on with her letter, and the frequent bursts of grief which still
obliged her, at intervals, to withhold her pen, were proofs enough of
her feeling how more than probable it was that she was writing for the
last time to Willoughby. Dashwood declared they should not stay a minute longer in
the house, and your brother was forced to go down upon _his_ knees too,
to persuade her to let them stay till they had packed up their clothes. She turned towards Lucy in silent amazement,
unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration; and though
her complexion varied, she stood firm in incredulity, and felt in no
danger of an hysterical fit, or a swoon. They should take care of their health and their
complexion. [Illustration]

“My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?” was a question
which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered the room, and
from all the others when they sat down to table. In spite of the
answer, therefore, she ordered the carriage, and drove to Mrs. “Indeed I have, sir,” was her answer. For my
part, I think they are vastly agreeable, provided they dress smart and
behave civil. Colonel
Brandon _must_ have some information to give. He had received a good education, but, on
succeeding early in life to a small independence, had become indisposed
for any of the more homely pursuits in which his brothers were engaged,
and had satisfied an active, cheerful mind and social temper by
entering into the militia of his county, then embodied. It
was contrary to every doctrine of hers that difference of fortune
should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of
disposition; and that Elinor’s merit should not be acknowledged by
every one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible. It is not a connexion to gratify; but if Mr. “John enters like a brother into my happiness,” continued Mr. They had not intended to go over till
the summer, but she is so impatient to see them again—for till she
married, last October, she was never away from them so much as a week,
which must make it very strange to be in different kingdoms, I was
going to say, but however different countries, and so she wrote a very
urgent letter to her mother—or her father, I declare I do not know
which it was, but we shall see presently in Jane’s letter—wrote in Mr. As for myself, it is many, many years
since I first began to think of him in a very different manner. Woodhouse for some time. I thought we _had_ been
safe.”

Marianne moved to the window. Wickham’s society was of material service in dispelling the gloom
which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn
family. Ferrars can be displeased, when he knows I have trusted you, because I
know he has the highest opinion in the world of all your family, and
looks upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quite as his own
sisters.”—She paused. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! “Have you heard from her yourself this morning?” cried he. Do clear _them_, too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of
somebody.”

“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my
opinion. It will pass away soon enough.”

“Do you suppose them to be in London?”

“Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?”

“And Lydia used to want to go to London,” added Kitty. Jennings was
luckily not come home, they could go directly to their own room, where
hartshorn restored her a little to herself. Bennet was most pressingly
civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn; and
addressed herself particularly to Mr. Its probability and its
eligibility have really so equalled each other! Partridge in
a day or two, and shall give her a strict charge to be on the look-out
for any thing eligible.”

“Thank you, but I would rather you did not mention the subject to her;
till the time draws nearer, I do not wish to be giving any body
trouble.”

“But, my dear child, the time is drawing near; here is April, and June,
or say even July, is very near, with such business to accomplish before
us. Collins’s letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her
at last to go, saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men come
for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”

Elizabeth’s mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after
half an hour’s quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join
the others with tolerable composure. But he is a liberal
master, I suppose, and _that_, in the eye of a servant, comprehends
every virtue.”

Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of
his behaviour to Wickham; and, therefore, gave them to understand, in as
guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from his
relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different
construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor
Wickham’s so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. John Dashwood very soon, and bring her
sisters to see her. Presuming, however,
that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of
society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for
her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on. Dashwood had been informed by her husband of the solemn promise on
the part of his son in their favour, which gave comfort to his last
earthly reflections. Perry’s coming
in soon after dinner, with a disengaged hour to give her father, she
lost no time in hurrying into the shrubbery.—There, with spirits
freshened, and thoughts a little relieved, she had taken a few turns,
when she saw Mr. He valued their kindness beyond any
thing, and his greatest happiness was in being with them. You could scarcely escape
discredit and misery. But Jane and Elizabeth, who
agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister’s feelings and
consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents,
urged him so earnestly, yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her
and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was
prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. He begins with
congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of
which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping
Lucases. But how came you to tell us that he was so
disagreeable?”

Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could: said that she had liked
him better when they met in Kent than before, and that she had never
seen him so pleasant as this morning. I have found him capable of
giving me much information on various subjects; and he has always
answered my inquiries with readiness of good-breeding and good nature.”

“That is to say,” cried Marianne contemptuously, “he has told you, that
in the East Indies the climate is hot, and the mosquitoes are
troublesome.”

“He _would_ have told me so, I doubt not, had I made any such
inquiries, but they happened to be points on which I had been
previously informed.”

“Perhaps,” said Willoughby, “his observations may have extended to the
existence of nabobs, gold mohrs, and palanquins.”

“I may venture to say that _his_ observations have stretched much
further than _your_ candour. had been a question of
his. How was she to bear the change?—It was true that her friend was going
only half a mile from them; but Emma was aware that great must be the
difference between a Mrs. I should
certainly have called at Hartfield, had you failed to come.”

The others had been talking of the child, Mrs. Weston or Mrs. I do assure you that my intimacy has not
yet taught me _that_. Cole was saying the other day she
wanted something from Kingston.”

“Mrs. On Saturday he came again. no—none in the least. Hill, in great astonishment, “don’t you know
there is an express come for master from Mr. Philips first brought her the news). Elinor only laughed. But as to my _letting_ her marry Robert Martin, it is
impossible; she has refused him, and so decidedly, I think, as must
prevent any second application. It
regarded a supper-room. Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of what she felt; and
before breakfast was ready, they had gone through the subject again and
again; and with the same steady conviction and affectionate counsel on
Elinor’s side, the same impetuous feelings and varying opinions on
Marianne’s, as before. Frank Churchill to come among them; and
the hope strengthened when it was understood that he had written to his
new mother on the occasion. For,
though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the
contrary, he was all attention to everybody. Perry was surprized to
hear you had fixed upon South End.”

“I know there is such an idea with many people, but indeed it is quite
a mistake, sir.—We all had our health perfectly well there, never found
the least inconvenience from the mud; and Mr. How could you suppose so? A resemblance in good-humour
and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of
their _three_ months’ acquaintance they had been intimate _two_. She
would not take a denial. “Why should you caution
me?—You do not think I care about Mr. His eyes want all that spirit, that fire, which at
once announce virtue and intelligence. That his repentance of misconduct, which thus brought its own
punishment, was sincere, need not be doubted;—nor that he long thought
of Colonel Brandon with envy, and of Marianne with regret. Knightley as infinitely the superior, or when his regard for her had
not been infinitely the most dear. His character sunk on every
review of it; and, as a punishment for him, as well as a possible
advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr. Marianne to be sure is lost to me for ever. You will
express yourself very properly, I am sure. You
cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is before you.”
And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. She would not let Jane say, ‘No;’ for when
Jane first heard of it, (it was the day before yesterday, the very
morning we were at Donwell,) when Jane first heard of it, she was quite
decided against accepting the offer, and for the reasons you mention;
exactly as you say, she had made up her mind to close with nothing till
Colonel Campbell’s return, and nothing should induce her to enter into
any engagement at present—and so she told Mrs. She is a
very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. My youngest of all is lately married,
and my eldest is somewhere about the ground, walking with a young man,
who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family.”

“You have a very small park here,” returned Lady Catherine, after a
short silence. Wallis can be uncivil and give a very rude answer, but we have never
known any thing but the greatest attention from them. Elton’s admiration. “My dear Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never
have called on us in this familiar way.”

But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely,
even to Charlotte’s wishes, to be the case; and, after various
conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from
the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable
from the time of year. Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to
marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had
a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found
them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report. And it cannot be
for the value of our custom now, for what is our consumption of bread,
you know? We cannot give any body the disagreeable hints that we
may have been very full of the hour before. She answered him with cold civility. CHAPTER XIX


If Emma had still, at intervals, an anxious feeling for Harriet, a
momentary doubt of its being possible for her to be really cured of her
attachment to Mr. She was not a woman of strong understanding or
any quickness; and with this resemblance of her father, she inherited
also much of his constitution; was delicate in her own health,
over-careful of that of her children, had many fears and many nerves,
and was as fond of her own Mr. Darcy’s indifference; and she could do nothing but
wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that, perhaps, instead of
his seeing too _little_, she might have fancied too _much_. Frank Churchill’s accommodation on his journey, through the sad evils
of sleeping two nights on the road, and express very genuine unmixed
anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped catching cold—which,
however, he could not allow him to feel quite assured of himself till
after another night. But she was not wanted to speak. An unpretending, single-minded, artless
girl—infinitely to be preferred by any man of sense and taste to such a
woman as Mrs. Some vague report had
reached her before of my attachment to some young lady in Devonshire,
and what had passed within her observation the preceding evening had
marked who the young lady was, and made her more jealous than ever. Edward
is very amiable, and I love him tenderly. “Ah! Woodhouse,
who had often been distressed by the more animated sort, which Mr. Rendered
spiritless by the ill success of all their endeavours, he had yielded to
his brother-in-law’s entreaty that he would return to his family and
leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable
for continuing their pursuit. With the assistance of his
mother-in-law, Sir John was not long in discovering that the name of
Ferrars began with an F. my dear Charlotte, impossible!”

The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her
story gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a
reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained
her composure, and calmly replied,--

“Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? He listened to her with silent attention, and on her ceasing to speak,
rose directly from his seat, and after saying in a voice of emotion,
“to your sister I wish all imaginable happiness; to Willoughby that he
may endeavour to deserve her,”—took leave, and went away. Do you suppose she does not often say all this to
herself? The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Did she call to refuse her consent?”

To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had
been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by his
repeating it. _Your_ sense of
honour and honesty would have led you, I know, when aware of your
situation, to attempt all the economy that would appear to you
possible: and, perhaps, as long as your frugality retrenched only on
your own comfort, you might have been suffered to practice it, but
beyond that—and how little could the utmost of your single management
do to stop the ruin which had begun before your marriage? never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which was repeated
to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B.,
intending to trace their route. It should not be said, that the Miss Bennets could not be at
home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers. Darcy,
you cannot deny the fact.”

“I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly
beyond my own party.”

“True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. [Illustration]

Mr. Of their all removing to Donwell, Emma had already had her own passing
thoughts. They are descended, on the maternal
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father’s, from respectable,
honourable, and ancient, though untitled, families. He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity. But is it
possible that you had no suspicion?—I mean of late. He seems an excellent man; and I
think him uncommonly pleasing.”

“So do I. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.”

“That is exactly what I should have supposed of you,” said Elizabeth. She is poor; she has sunk
from the comforts she was born to; and, if she live to old age, must
probably sink more. But enough of this. The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. I do not
perceive how you could express yourself more warmly.”

Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased. His attentive
behaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that their welfare
was dear to him, and, for a long time, she firmly relied on the
liberality of his intentions. Elinor and her mother rose up in amazement at their entrance, and while
the eyes of both were fixed on him with an evident wonder and a secret
admiration which equally sprung from his appearance, he apologized for
his intrusion by relating its cause, in a manner so frank and so
graceful that his person, which was uncommonly handsome, received
additional charms from his voice and expression. John Knightley, “and just as I hoped
it was from your letters. Jane desired me
to do it, so I always do: and so I began to-day with my usual caution;
but no sooner did I come to the mention of her being unwell, than I
burst out, quite frightened, with ‘Bless me! “What will be his surprise,” thought
she, “when he knows who they are! He
_was_ coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had
any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension
first got abroad, it hastened his journey.”

“And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? The
beginning, however, of every visit displayed none but the properest
feelings, and this being of necessity so short might be hoped to pass
away in unsullied cordiality. The bustle in the vestibule, as she passed along an inner lobby,
assured her that they were already in the house. Knightley remained with them, Emma’s fever continued;
but when he was gone, she began to be a little tranquillised and
subdued—and in the course of the sleepless night, which was the tax for
such an evening, she found one or two such very serious points to
consider, as made her feel, that even her happiness must have some
alloy. Collins pointed out, with a
rapturous air, the fine proportion and finished ornaments, they followed
the servants through an antechamber to the room where Lady Catherine,
her daughter, and Mrs. Mr. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called,
though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. From a reverie of this kind she was recalled at the
end of some minutes by Willoughby, who, rousing himself from a reverie
at least equally painful, started up in preparation for going, and
said—

“There is no use in staying here; I must be off.”

“Are you going back to town?”

“No—to Combe Magna. Knightley, do not
foretell vexation from that quarter.”

“Not I, indeed. What say you,
Mary? Mr. “I know _that_ is the feeling of you
all. That he might not be irritated into an absolute
fever, by the fire which Mr. Dashwood and Margaret came down stairs at the same
time, and they all sat down to look at one another, while Mrs. You shall not defend her, though
it is Charlotte Lucas. Wickham’s adieus were much more affectionate than his wife’s. Smallridge, too! You will never go to
Swisserland. Dashwood began shortly
to give over every hope of the kind, and to be convinced, from the
general drift of his discourse, that his assistance extended no farther
than their maintenance for six months at Norland. Elton might be; how
he was affected by the studied elegance of her dress, and her smiles of
graciousness. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete
victory over him, continued her triumph,--

“I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for
my part, except the shops and public places. Ferrars, just so violent
and so steady as to preserve her from that reproach which she always
seemed fearful of incurring, the reproach of being too amiable, Edward
was admitted to her presence, and pronounced to be again her son. There was deep consciousness about him, and he found it
easier to meet her eye than her friend’s. As long as Mr. Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either
consideration. She cast her eye over it, pondered, caught the meaning, read it through
again to be quite certain, and quite mistress of the lines, and then
passing it to Harriet, sat happily smiling, and saying to herself,
while Harriet was puzzling over the paper in all the confusion of hope
and dulness, “Very well, Mr. Ferrars; and such ill-timed praise of another, at Elinor’s
expense, though she had not any notion of what was principally meant by
it, provoked her immediately to say with warmth,

“This is admiration of a very particular kind!—what is Miss Morton to
us?—who knows, or who cares, for her?—it is Elinor of whom _we_ think
and speak.”

And so saying, she took the screens out of her sister-in-law’s hands,
to admire them herself as they ought to be admired. Elton, I believe I shall try
what I can do. How
inconsiderate, how indelicate, how irrational, how unfeeling had been
her conduct! They never could have been all three together, without
her having stabbed Jane Fairfax’s peace in a thousand instances; and on
Box Hill, perhaps, it had been the agony of a mind that would bear no
more. Knightley could not have observed him as she had done, neither
with the interest, nor (she must be allowed to tell herself, in spite
of Mr. But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures
continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia’s leaving
home. They walked on without knowing in what direction. They would doubtless be congenial with the
generality of female minds. She had heard nothing
of him since her leaving London, nothing new of his plans, nothing
certain even of his present abode. Mrs. Mr. In the hall they
parted. O that he had sprained his ancle in the first dance!”

“Oh, my dear,” continued Mrs. Miss Steele was the least discomposed of the
three, by their presence; and it was in their power to reconcile her to
it entirely. As soon as she came to her own name,
it was irresistible; every line relating to herself was interesting,
and almost every line agreeable; and when this charm ceased, the
subject could still maintain itself, by the natural return of her
former regard for the writer, and the very strong attraction which any
picture of love must have for her at that moment. I hear such different
accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.”

“I can readily believe,” answered he, gravely, “that reports may vary
greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were
not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to
fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”

“But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another
opportunity.”

“I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly replied. Ferrars, since eventually it promoted the
interest of Elinor. This
picture, she had allowed herself to believe, might have been
accidentally obtained; it might not have been Edward’s gift; but a
correspondence between them by letter, could subsist only under a
positive engagement, could be authorised by nothing else; for a few
moments, she was almost overcome—her heart sunk within her, and she
could hardly stand; but exertion was indispensably necessary; and she
struggled so resolutely against the oppression of her feelings, that
her success was speedy, and for the time complete. He could tell her nothing new of
the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were
worn out, like his information. Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give
pleasure; and, instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest
emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world. It was from Lady Middleton, announcing their arrival in Conduit
Street the night before, and requesting the company of her mother and
cousins the following evening. John Dashwood was a strong caricature of
himself;—more narrow-minded and selfish. He has loved her, my Elinor, ever since the first moment of seeing
her.”

Here, however, Elinor perceived,—not the language, not the professions
of Colonel Brandon, but the natural embellishments of her mother’s
active fancy, which fashioned every thing delightful to her as it
chose. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends
to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.”

“Has she been presented? “I often think,” said she, “that there is nothing so bad as parting with
one’s friends. I am sure my sisters must all envy me. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XXXIV. Girls, can I do
anything for you in Meryton? “I must go instantly to my mother,” she cried. I am sure I am not
extravagant in my demands. My astonishment!—but it would be impossible
to describe what I felt. She has no money, no connections, nothing that
can tempt him to--she is lost for ever.”

Darcy was fixed in astonishment. Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my
library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as
I can,--or perhaps I may defer it till Kitty runs away.”

“I am not going to run away, papa,” said Kitty, fretfully. Well, I wish him out of all his
trouble with all my heart, and a good wife into the bargain.”

So wondered, so talked Mrs. Knightley, feelingly; and for a moment or two he had done. If you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to
quit the sphere in which you have been brought up.”

“In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that
sphere. Bates was
saying something to Emma, whispered farther, “We do not say a word of
any _assistance_ that Perry might have; not a word of a certain young
physician from Windsor.—Oh! She was wanting to see him again, and especially to see him in
company with Mrs. I can
easily suppose that his age may appear much greater to you than to my
mother; but you can hardly deceive yourself as to his having the use of
his limbs!”

“Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism? You are
making a most disgraceful connection, and such a one as your family are
unanimous in disapproving.’ I cannot help thinking, in short, that
means might have been found. Bennet, and
we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.”

She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her
husband, called out, as she entered the library,--

“Oh, Mr. do you recommend this
side?—Well, I am sure, Mr. Marianne’s was finished in a very few minutes; in length it could be no
more than a note; it was then folded up, sealed, and directed with
eager rapidity. Other designs
might afterward arise.”

How long it had been carrying on between them, however, he was equally
at a loss with herself to make out; for at Oxford, where he had
remained for choice ever since his quitting London, he had had no means
of hearing of her but from herself, and her letters to the very last
were neither less frequent, nor less affectionate than usual. The course of true love never did run smooth—


A Hartfield edition of Shakespeare would have a long note on that
passage.”

“That Mr. Colonel Brandon’s partiality for Marianne, which had so early been
discovered by his friends, now first became perceptible to Elinor, when
it ceased to be noticed by them. For
my part, Mr. Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice
of what might be called economy in her own private expenses, she
frequently sent them. [Illustration: “Accompanied by their aunt”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“What can be the meaning of this?” said Charlotte, as soon as he was
gone. Weston remained with Mr. You
saw her with the Campbells, when she was the equal of every body she
mixed with, but here she is with a poor old grandmother, who has barely
enough to live on. Weston joined
the party, however, and when the baby was fetched, there was no longer
a want of subject or animation—or of courage and opportunity for Frank
Churchill to draw near her and say,

“I have to thank you, Miss Woodhouse, for a very kind forgiving message
in one of Mrs. The ladies had
passed near it in their way along the valley, but it was screened from
their view at home by the projection of a hill. But I was not then master enough of myself to know
what could or ought to be revealed. May was better for every thing than February. Weston will be so
obliging as to call here one morning, we may talk it over, and see what
can be done.”

“But, unfortunately, sir, my time is so limited—”

“Oh!” interrupted Emma, “there will be plenty of time for talking every
thing over. What happiness it must be to her good old
grandmother and excellent aunt, when she comes to visit them! I should never be happy without
     him, so think it no harm to be off. You must take care of yourself, Mrs. “This present from the Campbells,” said she—“this pianoforte is very
kindly given.”

“Yes,” he replied, and without the smallest apparent
embarrassment.—“But they would have done better had they given her
notice of it. Harriet, Mr. And when I returned home the ----shire
was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight’s time. How long has she been such a favourite? I wonder when
you _would_ have spoken if I had not asked you! Elton’s guidance, the very active
patroness of Jane Fairfax, and only sharing with others in a general
way, in knowing what was felt, what was meditated, what was done. He readily agreed to it. Wretched, wretched mistake!”

Darcy made no answer. With a little reserve of manner, Emma continued:

“You mean to return a favourable answer, I collect.”

“No, I do not; that is, I do not mean—What shall I do? The aunt was as tiresome
as ever; more tiresome, because anxiety for her health was now added to
admiration of her powers; and they had to listen to the description of
exactly how little bread and butter she ate for breakfast, and how
small a slice of mutton for dinner, as well as to see exhibitions of
new caps and new workbags for her mother and herself; and Jane’s
offences rose again. Then here is my last,”—unclosing a pretty sketch of a
gentleman in small size, whole-length—“my last and my best—my brother,
Mr. If he had been wavering before, as to what he should do, which had often
seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might
settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity
unblemished could make him. Elinor, with a very heavy heart, aware of the
pain she was going to communicate, and perceiving, by Marianne’s
letter, how ill she had succeeded in laying any foundation for it, then
sat down to write her mother an account of what had passed, and entreat
her directions for the future; while Marianne, who came into the
drawing-room on Mrs. she urged him so strongly to remain, that he, who was
gratifying the first wish of his own heart by a compliance, could not
long even affect to demur; especially as Mrs. And what possible claim could the Miss Dashwoods,
who were related to him only by half blood, which she considered as no
relationship at all, have on his generosity to so large an amount. They all waited in silence for the
appearance of their visitor. I dare say Mr. Miss Hawkins perhaps wanted a home, and thought
this the best offer she was likely to have.”

“Yes,” said Harriet earnestly, “and well she might, nobody could ever
have a better. Knightley, what a delightful party last
night; how extremely pleasant.—Did you ever see such dancing?—Was not
it delightful?—Miss Woodhouse and Mr. They are very well behaved, good kind of girls; and I
think the attention is due to them, as their uncle did so very well by
Edward. I long to make apologies, excuses, to urge something for
myself. “How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend to say. you will never guess. But two advantages will proceed from this delay. I know
the danger of indulging such speculations. Mr. The scene enlarged; two persons
appeared; Mrs. That is
good news however; I will ride over tomorrow, and ask him to dinner on
Thursday.”

“You know him then,” said Mrs. Another
pause therefore of many minutes’ duration, succeeded this speech, and
Lucy was still the first to end it. He shared it, however, in a silence even greater than her own. Mr. I come now to the relation of a misfortune, which about this time
befell Mrs. She tried, however, to compose herself to
answer him with patience, when he should have done. Do not wish me such an
evil.”

When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her
hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her, in a whisper, not to be a
simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant
in the eyes of a man often times his consequence. She had
always wanted to do every thing, and had made more progress both in
drawing and music than many might have done with so little labour as
she would ever submit to. I would have her understand me. When I got to Mr. But, to be sure, Lucy would not give ear to such kind of
talking; so she told him directly (with a great deal about sweet and
love, you know, and all that—Oh, la! “Though we have seen him once or twice
at my uncle’s, it is rather too much to pretend to know him very well.”

Elinor heard all this with attention and surprise. Collins so before you came. “There _is_ something a little stately in him, to be sure,” replied her
aunt; “but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I honour that part of the attention particularly; it shews it to
have been so thoroughly from the heart. And secretly she added to herself, “Lord
bless me! She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master were really
absent, but had not courage for it. How can you be so
unjust? Not a stone must be added to its walls, not an inch
to its size, if my feelings are regarded.”

“Do not be alarmed,” said Miss Dashwood, “nothing of the kind will be
done; for my mother will never have money enough to attempt it.”

“I am heartily glad of it,” he cried. Palmer made her no answer, and did not even raise his eyes from the
newspaper. Knightley and Harriet Smith!—It was a union to distance every
wonder of the kind.—The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax
became commonplace, threadbare, stale in the comparison, exciting no
surprize, presenting no disparity, affording nothing to be said or
thought.—Mr. Think, then, what I must have endured in
hearing it bandied between the Eltons with all the vulgarity of
needless repetition, and all the insolence of imaginary superiority. The ladies were somewhat more
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining, from an upper
window, that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse. “My dear friend,” cried Lucy, as soon as they were by themselves, “I
come to talk to you of my happiness. Dashwood should live fifteen years
we shall be completely taken in.”

“Fifteen years! Knightley.—Were this most unequal of all connexions to take place, on
her must rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning; for his
attachment, she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness of
Harriet’s;—and even were this not the case, he would never have known
Harriet at all but for her folly. I do not wish to avoid the walk. She had scarcely needed her
present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that
their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love rather
than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring
for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain
that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and
if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity
of having a companion. Aye, aye, that is the fact, depend upon it.”

Elinor contradicted it, however, very positively; and by relating that
she had herself been employed in conveying the offer from Colonel
Brandon to Edward, and, therefore, must understand the terms on which
it was given, obliged him to submit to her authority. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the
accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of
her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible,
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though, perhaps,
it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic
felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous
and invariably silly. Such a good-natured fellow! and Mrs. Frank’s mother would
never have been slighted as she was but for her. But unfortunately my own nicety, and the nicety of my
friends, have made me what I am, an idle, helpless being. Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitation to the house, was with
them almost every day; he came to look at Marianne and talk to Elinor,
who often derived more satisfaction from conversing with him than from
any other daily occurrence, but who saw at the same time with much
concern his continued regard for her sister. Weston’s good wine, and felt sure that he
would want to be talking nonsense. I felt for my sister most
severely. As they went down stairs together,
Charlotte said,--

“I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.”

“_That_ you certainly shall.”

“And I have another favour to ask. She was all pleasure and gratitude,
both for Harriet and herself, and longed to be thanking him; and though
too distant for speech, her countenance said much, as soon as she could
catch his eye again. For it is not five minutes since I
received Mrs. He had been most agreeable, most delightful; he had told
Harriet that he had seen them go by, and had purposely followed them;
other little gallantries and allusions had been dropt, but nothing
serious. The weather was
not tempting enough to draw the two others from their pencil and their
book, in spite of Marianne’s declaration that the day would be
lastingly fair, and that every threatening cloud would be drawn off
from their hills; and the two girls set off together. was not a man to be trusted. It had a most
favourable aspect; and, for half a minute, Emma felt the glory of
having schemed successfully. and, in some
points, there seems a hardness of heart about him.”

“Ah!” said Colonel Brandon, “there is, indeed! “Yes,—I left London this morning at eight o’clock, and the only ten
minutes I have spent out of my chaise since that time procured me a
nuncheon at Marlborough.”

The steadiness of his manner, and the intelligence of his eye as he
spoke, convincing Elinor, that whatever other unpardonable folly might
bring him to Cleveland, he was not brought there by intoxication, she
said, after a moment’s recollection,

“Mr. Perhaps to
Hartfield, perhaps to the Abbey Mill, perhaps into his woods.—Miss
Woodhouse, this is not like our friend Knightley!—Can you explain it?”

Emma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinary,
indeed, and that she had not a syllable to say for him. Elinor,
unable herself to determine whether it were better for Marianne to be
in London or at Barton, offered no counsel of her own except of
patience till their mother’s wishes could be known; and at length she
obtained her sister’s consent to wait for that knowledge. She read, and was surprized. Marianne looked again; her heart sunk within
her; and abruptly turning round, she was hurrying back, when the voices
of both her sisters were raised to detain her; a third, almost as well
known as Willoughby’s, joined them in begging her to stop, and she
turned round with surprise to see and welcome Edward Ferrars. He was in high spirits; as ready to talk and laugh as ever, and seemed
delighted to speak of his former visit, and recur to old stories: and
he was not without agitation. The misfortune of your birth ought to make you particularly
careful as to your associates. I do not wonder at you. Mrs. She was always having a glimpse of him
somewhere or other. Edward
have got some business at Oxford, he says; so he must go there for a
time; and after _that_, as soon as he can light upon a Bishop, he will
be ordained. “I wish we could contrive it,” said she; “but I cannot think of any
tolerable pretence for going in;—no servant that I want to inquire
about of his housekeeper—no message from my father.”

She pondered, but could think of nothing. “You are going in, I suppose?” said he. I always say there is
something direful in the sound: but nothing more is positively known of
the Tupmans, though a good many things I assure you are suspected; and
yet by their manners they evidently think themselves equal even to my
brother, Mr. “Did you tell her that you should soon return?”

“I do not know what I told her,” he replied, impatiently; “less than
was due to the past, beyond a doubt, and in all likelihood much more
than was justified by the future. Jennings’s endeavours to cure a
disappointment in love, by a variety of sweetmeats and olives, and a
good fire. What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always
coming here? I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss
Bingley; but her brother is even yet ignorant of it. But Miss Bates soon came—“Very happy and
obliged”—but Emma’s conscience told her that there was not the same
cheerful volubility as before—less ease of look and manner. You will find her manners beyond
anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be
acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect
which her rank will inevitably excite. He had been some time with Mr. It spoke such perfect amity.—He left
them immediately afterwards—gone in a moment. But if she continued to play whenever she
was asked by Mr. There is
something so shocking in a child’s being taken away from his parents
and natural home! He added, that Mr. Jennings, “we know the reason of all that very
well; if a certain person who shall be nameless, had been there, you
would not have been a bit tired: and to say the truth it was not very
pretty of him not to give you the meeting when he was invited.”

“Invited!” cried Marianne. I would give anything to know the
truth of it. “But at least, Mama, you cannot deny the absurdity of the accusation,
though you may not think it intentionally ill-natured. In short, you may as well give her a chance: you
understand me.”

But though Mrs. Whatever may have changed him now, (and nothing but the
blackest art employed against me can have done it), I was once as dear
to him as my own soul could wish. “He told me at
parting, that he should soon write; and he spoke in a manner which
seemed to promise me many particulars that could not be given now. “I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did you not tell me so before? Perry?—Has he been here this morning?—And how does he travel now?—Has
he set up his carriage?”

Emma soon recollected, and understood him; and while she joined in the
laugh, it was evident from Jane’s countenance that she too was really
hearing him, though trying to seem deaf. In comparison of Norland, it was poor and small indeed!—but the tears
which recollection called forth as they entered the house were soon
dried away. What! Mr. Elton?” to which his prompt reply
was, “Most readily, Mrs. Knightley called, and sat some time with Mr. Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her
application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited
manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she
had reached. And I will own to you, (I
am sure it will be safe), that so far as our living with Mr. “It was nearly three years after this unhappy period before I returned
to England. I never
heard of such a thing. “We had better move on, Mr. A few more to-morrows, and the party from London would
be arriving. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people
in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had
felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or
pleasure. He will be forgot, and we shall
all be as we were before.”

Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said
nothing. Does Mrs. And, without love, I am sure I should be a fool to change such a
situation as mine. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his
young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any
affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Had Elizabeth been at leisure
to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was
impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of
business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to
be written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their
sudden departure. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. Is every thing finally settled? Knightley does
nothing mysteriously.”

“I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly;
oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would, in the common
course of things, occur to him.”

“Very well; and if he had intended to give her one, he would have told
her so.”

“There might be scruples of delicacy, my dear Emma. I certainly will
not persuade myself to feel more than I do. At least you should not _remind_ your mother of inviting him.”

“As I did the other day,” said Elizabeth, with a conscious smile; “very
true, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. In one respect he is the object of my envy.”

Emma could say no more. “Will you be so kind,” said she, “when I am missed, as to say that I am
gone home?—I am going this moment.—My aunt is not aware how late it is,
nor how long we have been absent—but I am sure we shall be wanted, and
I am determined to go directly.—I have said nothing about it to any
body. You do not
know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in
such terms.”

“Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. Charlotte is very
pretty, I can tell you. I would not recommend an egg boiled by any body
else; but you need not be afraid, they are very small, you see—one of
our small eggs will not hurt you. But at the same
time, she could not help thinking that no one could so well perform it
as himself. I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure,
unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in; and I hope _my_ dinners
are good enough for her. You know I candidly told you
I should form my own opinion; and I am happy to say that I am extremely
pleased with him.—You may believe me. CHAPTER XXII. And so the letter that came today
finished it! You blush, Harriet.—Does any body else occur to you at this
moment under such a definition? A disagreeable truth would
be palatable through her lips, but I am the wretchedest being in the
world at a civil falsehood.”

“I do not believe any such thing,” replied Emma.—“I am persuaded that
you can be as insincere as your neighbours, when it is necessary; but
there is no reason to suppose the instrument is indifferent. “A letter of proper submission!” repeated he; “would they have me beg
my mother’s pardon for Robert’s ingratitude to _her_, and breach of
honour to _me?_ I can make no submission. How could
you be so unfeeling to Miss Bates? Elinor flattered herself that some one of their connections in London
would write to them to announce the event, and give farther
particulars,—but day after day passed off, and brought no letter, no
tidings. Elton took the reproof, so rapidly did
another subject succeed; for Mr. But she had
not been there two minutes when she found that Harriet’s habits of
dependence and imitation were bringing her up too, and that, in short,
they would both be soon after her. Knightley, as I told you before. No additional agitation should be
thrown at this period among those she loved—and the evil should not act
on herself by anticipation before the appointed time.—A fortnight, at
least, of leisure and peace of mind, to crown every warmer, but more
agitating, delight, should be hers. She had received a very
recent proof of its impartiality.—How shocked had he been by her
behaviour to Miss Bates! A _Mrs._ _Elton_ would be
an excuse for any change of intercourse; former intimacy might sink
without remark. How many a man
has committed himself on a short acquaintance, and rued it all the rest
of his life!”

Miss Fairfax, who had seldom spoken before, except among her own
confederates, spoke now. If one thinks of all that it has to do,
and all that it does so well, it is really astonishing!”

“It is certainly very well regulated.”

“So seldom that any negligence or blunder appears! It may be only the hair of some great uncle of
_his_.”

“But, indeed, Elinor, it is Marianne’s. The necessity of concealing from her mother and Marianne, what had been
entrusted in confidence to herself, though it obliged her to unceasing
exertion, was no aggravation of Elinor’s distress. He was at the same time haughty,
reserved, and fastidious; and his manners, though well bred, were not
inviting. He is but young, and his uncle, perhaps—”

“My dear papa, he is three-and-twenty. Elton is totally without. In short, I can feel no
dependence on his coming, and I wish Mr. Bennet: one communication
would, therefore, do for all. She dreaded the performance of
it, dreaded what its effect on Marianne might be; doubted whether after
such an explanation she could ever be happy with another; and for a
moment wished Willoughby a widower. Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne, whose fine eyes were
fixed so expressively on Willoughby, as plainly denoted how well she
understood him. Dixon, but this is a punishment
beyond what you can have merited!—The kindness and protection of Mrs. Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned
by any of us.”

“These are heavy misfortunes,” replied Elizabeth. A lady’s
imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love
to matrimony, in a moment. When all this was resolved
     on, he returned again to his friends, who were still staying at
     Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in London once more
     when the wedding took place, and all money matters were then to
     receive the last finish. “I am delighted with the plan,” she cried, “it is exactly what I could
wish. Prescriptions poured in from all quarters, and as usual, were all
declined. I
can easily believe that letters are very little to you, much less than
to me, but it is not your being ten years older than myself which makes
the difference, it is not age, but situation. Others of the party were now applied to. Believe me,
sir, I am far, very far, from gratified in being the object of such
professions.”

“Good Heaven!” cried Mr. Whenever he had a touch of his old
colicky gout, he said it did him more good than any thing else in the
world. how fond he was of it! Bingley, it is very
hard to have her taken away from me. Weston, and did not
herself know what to think. Her own father’s perfect exemption from any thought of the kind, the
entire deficiency in him of all such sort of penetration or suspicion,
was a most comfortable circumstance. Knightley.—It seemed as if there were an instantaneous impression in
her favour, as if his eyes received the truth from hers, and all that
had passed of good in her feelings were at once caught and honoured.—
He looked at her with a glow of regard. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she
called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was,
though Mrs. Weston! The
promise, therefore, was given, and must be performed. but Jane Fairfax has them both, Harriet.”

“Are you sure? Thy ready wit the word will soon supply,
    May its approval beam in that soft eye! And when I brought out
the baked apples from the closet, and hoped our friends would be so
very obliging as to take some, ‘Oh!’ said he directly, ‘there is
nothing in the way of fruit half so good, and these are the
finest-looking home-baked apples I ever saw in my life.’ That, you
know, was so very.... “Yes, he would give
them three thousand pounds: it would be liberal and handsome! Bingley and his
sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and
politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Miss Morton, only daughter of the
late Lord Morton, with thirty thousand pounds. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as
soon as they were gone, Mr. They were soon within thirty
yards of the gentleman. Goddard, requesting, in most
respectful terms, to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her; a most
welcome request: for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen, whom Emma knew
very well by sight, and had long felt an interest in, on account of her
beauty. And how beautiful we thought he
looked! “I am trying to make it out.”

“And what is your success?”

She shook her head. I have frequently thought
that I must have been intended by nature to be fond of low company, I
am so little at my ease among strangers of gentility!”

“Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inattention of hers,” said
Elinor. Here you are in your own family.”

“Upon my word I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house in the
neighbourhood, except Netherfield. it was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong
an affection. He
should have respected even unreasonable scruples, had there been such;
but hers were all reasonable. Where is your merit? there is one difficulty unprovided for,” cried Emma. Edward has drawn his own lot, and I fear it
will be a bad one.”

Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension; and Elinor’s heart wrung
for the feelings of Edward, while braving his mother’s threats, for a
woman who could not reward him. Such talent as hers
must not be suffered to remain unknown.—I dare say you have heard those
charming lines of the poet,

‘Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
    ‘And waste its fragrance on the desert air.’


We must not allow them to be verified in sweet Jane Fairfax.”

“I cannot think there is any danger of it,” was Emma’s calm answer—“and
when you are better acquainted with Miss Fairfax’s situation and
understand what her home has been, with Colonel and Mrs. Knightley, who had been of the party, and had
seen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side, he was
expressing the next morning, being at Hartfield again on business with
Mr. CHAPTER XV. And it is not merely the house—the
grounds, I assure you, as far as I could observe, are strikingly like. You have
proved your heart less wicked, much less wicked. Weston had
received. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention
all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me
leave to say, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate,
and such things may come out as will shock your relations to hear.”

“I am not afraid of you,” said he, smilingly. Oh! Bingley might like you the best of the
party.”

“My dear, you flatter me. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on
Tuesday could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday
endurable to Kitty and Lydia. Elton’s seeming resolved to learn to like it too. Elizabeth listened as little as she
could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham’s name. I will think
no more about him.”

Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach
of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look which showed her
better satisfied with their visitors than Elizabeth. My visits to Mrs. Do you think him so very plain?”

“He is very plain, undoubtedly—remarkably plain:—but that is nothing
compared with his entire want of gentility. Perry says that colds have been very general, but not so heavy
as he has very often known them in November. At last he turned round again, and regarded them both; she started up,
and pronouncing his name in a tone of affection, held out her hand to
him. Churchill lived, I suppose there could not have
been a hope, a chance, a possibility;—but scarcely are her remains at
rest in the family vault, than her husband is persuaded to act exactly
opposite to what she would have required. “This will not be your only visit
to Randalls.”

“Ah!—(shaking his head)—the uncertainty of when I may be able to
return!—I shall try for it with a zeal!—It will be the object of all my
thoughts and cares!—and if my uncle and aunt go to town this spring—but
I am afraid—they did not stir last spring—I am afraid it is a custom
gone for ever.”

“Our poor ball must be quite given up.”

“Ah! I am sure they will bring him
soon.”

She opened the parlour door, and saw two gentlemen sitting with her
father—Mr. They separated
too much into parties. What immediately followed is
known. She answered in the affirmative; and, unable to resist
the temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had just
been forming a new acquaintance.”

The effect was immediate. “And will you promise me never to enter into such an engagement?”

“I will make no promise of the kind.”

“Miss Bennet, I am shocked and astonished. Darcy had been at her
sister’s wedding. Your uncle and aunt will never allow you to leave
England.”

“They may be induced to go too. _You_
may ask questions which _I_ shall not choose to answer.”

“This is not to be borne. If you do not call early it will be a slight.”

The son looked convinced. Perry’s setting up his carriage! /* NIND “My dear friend, */

     “If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and
     me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our
     lives; for a whole day’s _tête-à-tête_ between two women can never
     end without a quarrel. The two youngest of the family,
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions:
their minds were more vacant than their sisters’, and when nothing
better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning
hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and, however bare of
news the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn
some from their aunt. They did as they were desired; and by the time
she judged it reasonable to have done with her boot, she had the
comfort of farther delay in her power, being overtaken by a child from
the cottage, setting out, according to orders, with her pitcher, to
fetch broth from Hartfield. But as she wanted to be drawing, the
declaration must wait a little longer. From what she had said of her resolution to
prevent the marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate an
application to her nephew; and how he might take a similar
representation of the evils attached to a connection with her she dared
not pronounce. Well, so much
the better for him. Such formidable accounts of
her Ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas,
who had been little used to company; and she looked forward to her
introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done
to his presentation at St. very true indeed. They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of
the scene: it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and
the valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the
stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered
it. Neither Mr. At the time of the ballroom’s being built,
suppers had not been in question; and a small card-room adjoining, was
the only addition. Elton
for being there, Emma guessed that there had been a little show of
resentment towards Jane, from the vicarage quarter, which was now
graciously overcome.—After a few whispers, indeed, which placed it
beyond a guess, Mrs. How can I ask them away from her?”

Her husband, but with great humility, did not see the force of her
objection. There is no doubt of your doing exceedingly well,—quite as
well, or better, perhaps, all things considered. Weston, “about Perry and a
carriage? While the contents of the first
letter remained on her mind, she was all surprise, all astonishment,
that Wickham should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marry
for money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him had appeared
incomprehensible. Darcy before they
had known anything of the matter. They will be so very happy to see you.”

“No, no; your room is full enough. On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon,
whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Dashwood, how excessively comfortable your mother-in-law
and her daughters may live on the interest of seven thousand pounds,
besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls, which
brings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece, and, of course, they will
pay their mother for their board out of it. I am in no hurry. Letters are no matter of indifference; they are generally a very
positive curse.”

“You are speaking of letters of business; mine are letters of
friendship.”

“I have often thought them the worst of the two,” replied he coolly. John Dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly sorry
he was that she had taken a house at such a distance from Norland as to
prevent his being of any service to her in removing her furniture. We shall only be making each other more
angry. “I hope, Marianne,” continued Elinor, “you do not consider him as
deficient in general taste. But I believe your opinion of him would in general
astonish--and, perhaps, you would not express it quite so strongly
anywhere else. But think no more of the letter. The officers will find
women better worth their notice. Every body is asleep!”

“I am ready,” said Emma, “whenever I am wanted.”

“Whom are you going to dance with?” asked Mr. No one, at least, can
think I have not done enough for them: even themselves, they can hardly
expect more.”

“There is no knowing what _they_ may expect,” said the lady, “but we
are not to think of their expectations: the question is, what you can
afford to do.”

“Certainly—and I think I may afford to give them five hundred pounds
a-piece. Mr. She would have given a great deal, or endured a great deal, to have had
the Martins in a higher rank of life. and Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a
note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited
for an answer. Willoughby, what is the meaning of this? She
had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a
fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she
might wish to talk again of either. How completely it meant, ‘why should my picture be
drawn?’”

“Oh! I shall send for my
     clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell Sally to
     mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are packed
     up. Don’t let her imagine that you have spoken of her as a
pretty young woman.”

“I hope I should know better,” he replied; “no, depend upon it, (with a
gallant bow,) that in addressing Mrs. It amused her to observe that all her friends seemed determined to send
her to Delaford;—a place, in which, of all others, she would now least
chuse to visit, or wish to reside; for not only was it considered as
her future home by her brother and Mrs. “And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real
truth? She instantly saw that her ears had not
deceived her. Gardiner this moment on business that cannot be delayed;
I have not an instant to lose.”

“Good God! Elton’s absenting himself. He will suffer enough in them.”

“Do you compare your conduct with his?”

“No. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? “If he could stay only a couple of days,
he ought to come; and one can hardly conceive a young man’s not having
it in his power to do as much as that. Her own attachment had
really subsided into a mere nothing; it was not worth thinking of;—but
if he, who had undoubtedly been always so much the most in love of the
two, were to be returning with the same warmth of sentiment which he
had taken away, it would be very distressing. On the
contrary, with a mind and body alike strengthened by rest, she looked
and spoke with more genuine spirit, anticipating the pleasure of
Margaret’s return, and talking of the dear family party which would
then be restored, of their mutual pursuits and cheerful society, as the
only happiness worth a wish. He knew
of no one but Mrs. But the
rest, which one night entirely sleepless, and many hours of the most
wearing anxiety seemed to make requisite, was kept off by irritation of
spirits. She knew but little
of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness
which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time
after receiving his explanatory letter. there he is. Knightleys, commanded his fullest dependence. Command yourself enough
to say no more, and I will endeavour to forget it.”

But Mr. Bingley had not been of
age two years when he was tempted, by an accidental recommendation, to
look at Netherfield House. I think him every thing that is worthy and
amiable.”

“I am sure,” replied Elinor, with a smile, “that his dearest friends
could not be dissatisfied with such commendation as that. Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. go to-day, go to-day. At such a time much might
have been said, and silence was very awkward. But papa is so disagreeable.”

“A little sea-bathing would set me up for ever.”

“And my aunt Philips is sure it would do _me_ a great deal of good,”
added Kitty. Dashwood’s estimation he was as faultless as in Marianne’s; and
Elinor saw nothing to censure in him but a propensity, in which he
strongly resembled and peculiarly delighted her sister, of saying too
much what he thought on every occasion, without attention to persons or
circumstances. Oh! Her sister’s earnest, though gentle persuasion, however,
soon softened her to compliance, and Elinor saw her lay her aching head
on the pillow, and as she hoped, in a way to get some quiet rest before
she left her. I saw
the word, and am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining
to the one, and so very distressing to the other.”

Emma was extremely confused. He
arranges the business just as he pleases.”

“And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least
great pleasure in the power of choice. “No—nor many weeks.”

Mrs. “Well, girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, “what
say you to the day? Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more
interest than the matter had ever

[Illustration:

     “So much love and eloquence”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

excited before, how many years longer Mr. Woodhouse, “I think there are few places with such
society as Highbury. Elton being the adoration of all the teachers and great
girls in the school; and it must be at Hartfield only that she could
have any chance of hearing him spoken of with cooling moderation or
repellent truth. Who would
have thought it? Have you not received my
letters? and to you too, that had been used to live in Barton cottage! She listened most
attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence,
his taste, or his good manners. She caught every syllable with panting eagerness; her hand,
unknowingly to herself, closely pressed her sister’s, and tears covered
her cheeks. “We have been calling at Randalls,” said she, “and found them both at
home; and very pleasant people they seem to be. But they would have been improved by some share of
his frankness and warmth; and her visit was long enough to detract
something from their first admiration, by showing that, though
perfectly well-bred, she was reserved, cold, and had nothing to say for
herself beyond the most common-place inquiry or remark. And, in fact, you have heard all the essential already. Pray forgive
     me, if I have been very presuming, or at least do not punish me so
     far as to exclude me from P. Elinor, according to her expectation, saw on the two or three following
days, that Marianne did not continue to gain strength as she had done;
but while her resolution was unsubdued, and she still tried to appear
cheerful and easy, her sister could safely trust to the effect of time
upon her health. Elton, in fancying himself a very decided favourite. Dorsetshire! They arrived in due time at the place of destination, and as soon as
the string of carriages before them would allow, alighted, ascended the
stairs, heard their names announced from one landing-place to another
in an audible voice, and entered a room splendidly lit up, quite full
of company, and insufferably hot. He declared himself to have been totally unsuspicious
of her sister’s attachment; and she could not help remembering what
Charlotte’s opinion had always been. I think, Miss Woodhouse, you and I must establish a
musical club, and have regular weekly meetings at your house, or ours. I assure
you that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with
myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. Bennet was told of this, she did
not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering
what her anxiety for his life had been before. It was her superior duty. But at last she
found herself with some surprise, accosted by Miss Steele, who, though
looking rather shy, expressed great satisfaction in meeting them, and
on receiving encouragement from the particular kindness of Mrs. Darcy?”

“As much as I ever wish to be,” cried Elizabeth, warmly. I wonder what I
should do with it!”

Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point. Goddard was full of care and affection, Mr. Nancy, she fell upon her knees, and cried bitterly; and
your brother, he walked about the room, and said he did not know what
to do. Why would not Marianne come?”

Elinor made what excuse she could for her. Mr. We feel things differently. ‘My dear
fellow,’ I should have said, ‘consider what you are doing. Knightley, and turned to him for help. While she was gone, Mr. Let me hear any thing rather than what you are all
thinking of. Perry herself
mentioned it to my mother, and the Coles knew of it as well as
ourselves—but it was quite a secret, known to nobody else, and only
thought of about three days. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Suckling, the Highbury world were obliged to endure the mortification
of hearing that they could not possibly come till the autumn. Lady Catherine herself says
that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the
handsomest of her sex; because there is that in her features which marks
the young woman of distinguished birth. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell
you that I do not want to dance a reel at all; and now despise me if you
dare.”

“Indeed I do not dare.”

Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his
gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her
manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody, and Darcy had
never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. Ferrars’s marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation;
for he did not suppose it possible that Delaford living could supply
such an income, as anybody in his style of life would venture to settle
on, and he said so. My perpetual influence could not
begin earlier, or you would not have been so much out of humour
before.”

“Three o’clock yesterday! Books of engravings, drawers of medals, cameos, corals,
shells, and every other family collection within his cabinets, had been
prepared for his old friend, to while away the morning; and the
kindness had perfectly answered. If he
no longer cares for me, why silent? Why, Jane--you never dropped a word of this--you sly
thing! The style of the visit, and
the shortness of it, were then felt to be decisive. His chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing
past sorrows and present humiliations, was given in the pitying eye
with which Marianne sometimes observed him, and the gentleness of her
voice whenever (though it did not often happen) she was obliged, or
could oblige herself to speak to him. His disposition
must be dreadful.”

“I will not trust myself on the subject,” replied Wickham; “_I_ can
hardly be just to him.”

Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, “To
treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his
father!” She could have added, “A young man, too, like _you_, whose very
countenance may vouch for your being amiable.” But she contented herself
with--“And one, too, who had probably been his own companion from
childhood, connected together, as I think you said, in the closest
manner.”

“We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest
part of our youth was passed together: inmates of the same house,
sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her
implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who
answered this description, when Mr. As I must,
therefore, conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, I
shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by
suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.”

“I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind
of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. His
reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. So would poor little Harriet. And so you
are most comfortably settled in your little cottage and want for
nothing! Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. Frank Churchill’s
going, she proceeded to give them all, it was of no consequence. Why must _she_ be scampering about the
country, because her sister had a cold? Excepting yourself and your
brother, I do not know his equal for temper. But, unluckily for her
Ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise. Bingley did
not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as
for his own, and we must expect him to keep or quit it on the same
principle.”

“I should not be surprised,” said Darcy, “if he were to give it up as
soon as any eligible purchase offers.”

Elizabeth made no answer. I am glad of one thing, that he comes
alone; because we shall see the less of him. But now it comes out. Trust to me.”

“Oh! She opened the packet; it was too surely so;—a
note from Mrs. James’s. She is always so
attentive to them!”

Emma’s colour was heightened by this unjust praise; and with a smile,
and shake of the head, which spoke much, she looked at Mr. Hughes I
declare—and Mrs. Dashwood entered into all their feelings with a warmth which left
her no inclination for checking this excessive display of them. But at last a
soft, genial morning appeared; such as might tempt the daughter’s
wishes and the mother’s confidence; and Marianne, leaning on Elinor’s
arm, was authorised to walk as long as she could without fatigue, in
the lane before the house. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. poor Jane is ill!’—which
my mother, being on the watch, heard distinctly, and was sadly alarmed
at. Philips’s throwing up the parlour window, and loudly seconding the
invitation. But
perseverance in humility of conduct and messages, in self-condemnation
for Robert’s offence, and gratitude for the unkindness she was treated
with, procured her in time the haughty notice which overcame her by its
graciousness, and led soon afterwards, by rapid degrees, to the highest
state of affection and influence. The Miss Dashwoods had no greater reason to be dissatisfied with Mrs. That is, _I_ always had a strong persuasion
he would be here again soon, I was sure something favourable would turn
up—but nobody believed me. He comes to Highbury himself, he
says, six days out of the seven, and has always business at Ford’s. I do not mean to
complain, however; it is undoubtedly a comfortable one, and I hope will
in time be better. was not that her own doing too? Bates’s youngest
daughter. Bennet seemed incapable
of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match. Wickham too. Her sister was
perhaps laid down upon the bed, or in her dressing gown, and therefore
not able to come to them. They had music; Emma was obliged to play; and the
thanks and praise which necessarily followed appeared to her an
affectation of candour, an air of greatness, meaning only to shew off
in higher style her own very superior performance. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline’s
interested wishes; and she could not for a moment suppose that those
wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man
so totally independent of everyone. She must have found the evening
agreeable, Mr. Many of my acquaintance are
already there for the winter: I wish I could hear that you, my dearest
friend, had any intention of making one in the crowd, but of that I
despair. Then pray speak aloud. “Yes, yes, pray pass _me_,” added her husband, with a sort of sneering
consciousness; “_I_ have nothing to say that can entertain Miss
Woodhouse, or any other young lady. “And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend’s anxious
circumspection! But why? And this belief produced another dread. Weston_.]


Windsor—July. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your
connections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relations whose
condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?”

Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to
the utmost to speak with composure when she said,--

“You are mistaken, Mr. Dashwood, and he found fresh reason to rejoice
in what he had done for Mr. It will do you good to speak of your
distress, whatever it may be.”

“Have you indeed no idea?” said Mrs. “Ah, my dear,” said he, “poor Miss Taylor—It is a grievous business.”

“Oh yes, sir,” cried she with ready sympathy, “how you must miss her! Her cousin prefaced his speech with
a solemn bow, and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if
hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,”
“Hunsford,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.” It vexed her to see him
expose himself to such a man. It was not till the afternoon, when he joined them at tea, that
Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly
expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, “Say
nothing of that. The pain of his continued residence in Highbury, however, must
certainly be lessened by his marriage. It was foolish, it was
wrong, to take so active a part in bringing any two people together. They owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, everything to
him. He
did not believe there was a bolder rider in England! And so
excellent in the Church! Willoughby.”

“Mr. On finding
Mrs. I will not apologize therefore for bringing it forward again.”

“Thank you,” cried Lucy warmly, “for breaking the ice; you have set my
heart at ease by it; for I was somehow or other afraid I had offended
you by what I told you that Monday.”

“Offended me! After receiving a very indifferent education she is left in Mrs. I mend
pens remarkably well.”

“Thank you--but I always mend my own.”

“How can you contrive to write so even?”

He was silent. how delightful! His behaviour to her sister was such during dinnertime as showed an
admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded
Elizabeth, that, if left wholly to himself, Jane’s happiness, and his
own, would be speedily secured. The party then gathered
round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were
to have on the morrow. Delaford is a nice place, I can tell you; exactly
what I call a nice old fashioned place, full of comforts and
conveniences; quite shut in with great garden walls that are covered
with the best fruit-trees in the country; and such a mulberry tree in
one corner! She doubted the sincerity of this assurance no
more than he had doubted it himself, and she thought of it for her
daughters’ sake with satisfaction, though as for herself she was
persuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000£ would support her in
affluence. A great deal more passed at the
other table. Cleveland was a spacious, modern-built house, situated on a sloping
lawn. “Who told you that Mr. The house and the garden, with all the objects surrounding
them, were now become familiar, and the ordinary pursuits which had
given to Norland half its charms were engaged in again with far greater
enjoyment than Norland had been able to afford, since the loss of their
father. In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,
with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and the
improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the
gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. They talked
of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit, of everything but
himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Cole approaching to entreat Miss Woodhouse would do
them the honour of trying it. When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant
information of what was going on; and their uncle promised, at parting,
to prevail on Mr. She knew that at times she must be missed; and could not think, without
pain, of Emma’s losing a single pleasure, or suffering an hour’s ennui,
from the want of her companionableness: but dear Emma was of no feeble
character; she was more equal to her situation than most girls would
have been, and had sense, and energy, and spirits that might be hoped
would bear her well and happily through its little difficulties and
privations. Willoughby, or making the slightest
allusion to what has passed, before my sister. She had scarcely
a stronger regret than for her past coldness; and the person, whom she
had been so many months neglecting, was now the very one on whom she
would have lavished every distinction of regard or sympathy. for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were well. CHAPTER XXXVIII. This would not do; she immediately
stopped, under pretence of having some alteration to make in the lacing
of her half-boot, and stooping down in complete occupation of the
footpath, begged them to have the goodness to walk on, and she would
follow in half a minute. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been
given, to remind her of her post. Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified,
never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. It is fit that the fortune
should be on his side, for I think the merit will be all on hers.”

Such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs. In this state Frank Churchill had found her, she trembling and
conditioning, they loud and insolent. Weston was giving her a momentary glance; and she
was herself struck by his warmth. Why had not Miss Woodhouse revived the
former good old days of the room?—She who could do any thing in
Highbury! They must all go to Brighton. Palmer, and the Middletons. You will see nothing of it by candlelight. I have had such a time of
it! Emma
accepted it with a very eager hand, with an impatience all alive to
know what he would say about it, and not at all checked by hearing that
her friend was unmentioned. He could do
nothing till he were assured of his fate with Miss Dashwood; and by his
rapidity in seeking _that_ fate, it is to be supposed, in spite of the
jealousy with which he had once thought of Colonel Brandon, in spite of
the modesty with which he rated his own deserts, and the politeness
with which he talked of his doubts, he did not, upon the whole, expect
a very cruel reception. You are in a melancholy humour, and fancy that any one unlike
yourself must be happy. The world had made him extravagant and
vain—Extravagance and vanity had made him cold-hearted and selfish. I should scold her myself, if she were capable of
wishing to check the delight of your conversation with our new friend.”
Marianne was softened in a moment. There was
always sufficient reason for such an attention; Mrs. But
it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that I had any
apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment. Won’t it, Kitty?”

Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home. You will be a very happy woman.”

Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his
goodness. This was too much. I hope you will be
pleased with my son; but you must not expect a prodigy. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a
country neighbourhood. I believe,” she added in a low voice, “he would
have been very glad to have had me, if he could. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister
will prove what she felt:--

     “My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in
     her better judgment, at my expense, when I confess myself to have
     been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley’s regard for me. Without knowing when the carriage
turned into Vicarage Lane, or when it stopped, they found themselves,
all at once, at the door of his house; and he was out before another
syllable passed.—Emma then felt it indispensable to wish him a good
night. If dancing formed the amusement of
the night, they were partners for half the time; and when obliged to
separate for a couple of dances, were careful to stand together and
scarcely spoke a word to any body else. I have not time to speak to Mrs. Pratt. I understand that Mr. It is
done, however, and it was done for the best. After a few moments’
chat, John Dashwood, recollecting that Fanny was yet uninformed of her
sister’s being there, quitted the room in quest of her; and Elinor was
left to improve her acquaintance with Robert, who, by the gay
unconcern, the happy self-complacency of his manner while enjoying so
unfair a division of his mother’s love and liberality, to the prejudice
of his banished brother, earned only by his own dissipated course of
life, and that brother’s integrity, was confirming her most
unfavourable opinion of his head and heart. Weston proposed having no regular supper; merely sandwiches, &c.,
set out in the little room; but that was scouted as a wretched
suggestion. Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?”

“I leave it to yourself to determine,” said Mr. This
will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels about Emma, Mr. When my
niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her
having two men-servants go with her. You would be surprised to hear how often I watched you, how
often I was on the point of falling in with you. Weston!—Astonished that the person who had brought me up should be a
gentlewoman! She comforted her father better than she could comfort herself, by
representing that though he certainly would make them nine, yet he
always said so little, that the increase of noise would be very
immaterial. Bingley for his sister. But I have done it. Perry recommended nourishing food; but every thing they
could command (and never had any body such good neighbours) was
distasteful. “Has he been here on
this occasion—or has he not?”

“He has not been here yet,” replied Emma. Mr. Weston.—“Very
well, I thank you, ma’am. They could
not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character
from their own feelings and his servant’s report, without any reference
to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known
would not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy then
was. I owe such a grudge to myself
for the stupid, rascally folly of my own heart, that all my past
sufferings under it are only triumph and exultation to me now. Elton, of the utmost advantage
to the latter. and then I would
_chaperon_ you about to all the balls. and
Mrs. His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and
dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion. Indeed, brother, your
anxiety for our welfare and prosperity carries you too far.”

“Why, to be sure,” said he, seeming to recollect himself, “people have
little, have very little in their power. I have three unanswerable reasons for disliking Colonel
Brandon; he threatened me with rain when I wanted it to be fine; he has
found fault with the hanging of my curricle, and I cannot persuade him
to buy my brown mare. They will be
much more able to give _you_ something.”

“Upon my word,” said Mr. Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls, communicating all
that was immediately important of their state and plans. Marianne slept through every blast; and the
travellers—they had a rich reward in store, for every present
inconvenience. Churchill,” replied
Isabella: “and I am sure I never think of that poor young man without
the greatest compassion. His errand at Barton, in fact, was a simple one. Bennet found, with amazement and horror,
that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his
daughter. Woodhouse little suspected what was plotting against him in
the breast of that man whom he was so cordially welcoming, and so
anxiously hoping might not have taken cold from his ride.—Could he have
seen the heart, he would have cared very little for the lungs; but
without the most distant imagination of the impending evil, without the
slightest perception of any thing extraordinary in the looks or ways of
either, he repeated to them very comfortably all the articles of news
he had received from Mr. I can never bear to think of
you all there without me.”

“These are difficulties which you must settle for yourself. “Yes, ma’am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him--just
as affable to the poor.”

Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Nothing wanting. “Ah! The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. My sister, I am
sure, will not hear of her removal.”

“You may depend upon it, madam,” said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,
“that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while she
remains with us.”

Mrs. She turned
from sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at
length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of
some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it was a
great while since she had been there. Robert Ferrars?” asked Elinor. you answer as discreetly as she could do herself. I
am not sensible of having done anything wrong in walking over Mrs. He had gone three miles round one day in
order to bring her some walnuts, because she had said how fond she was
of them, and in every thing else he was so very obliging. Knightley, and residing in the parish of Donwell—very
creditably, she believed—she knew Mr. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel
of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss
Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued
the subject by saying, “But tell me all and everything about it which I
have not already heard. Your
business cannot be with _me_. “How much I am obliged to you,” said he, “for telling me to come
to-day!—If it had not been for you, I should certainly have lost all
the happiness of this party. Can I do any thing for you?”

“Oh! I did not know before that I had _two_ daughters on the brink
of matrimony. He had told her that
he could not allow himself the pleasure of stopping at Hartfield, as he
was to be at home by the middle of the day. Jennings, “should not stand upon such
ceremony.”

“Then you would be very ill-bred,” cried Mr. A man who felt rightly would say at
once, simply and resolutely, to Mrs. The child to be born at Randalls must be a tie there even dearer than
herself; and Mrs. I wonder
which she will think the handsomest, Henry or John?”

“Aye, I wonder which she will. Martin had been there an hour before, and
finding she was not at home, nor particularly expected, had left a
little parcel for her from one of his sisters, and gone away; and on
opening this parcel, she had actually found, besides the two songs
which she had lent Elizabeth to copy, a letter to herself; and this
letter was from him, from Mr. We must not
all expect Jane’s good fortune.”

“True,” said Mr. Bennet by admiring Mrs. A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins’s name was first mentioned in
Highbury, before she was, by some means or other, discovered to have
every recommendation of person and mind; to be handsome, elegant,
highly accomplished, and perfectly amiable: and when Mr. Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. A little while ago, he was at Weymouth. Marianne was still handsomer. You cannot mean that he
has even proposed to her again—yet. Knightley’s or Mr. Elton’s situation was most suitable, quite the
gentleman himself, and without low connexions; at the same time, not of
any family that could fairly object to the doubtful birth of Harriet. Their attention to our comfort, their friendliness
in every particular, is more than I can express.”

“I am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word; extremely glad indeed. “But you need not imagine Mr. Marianne Dashwood was born to an extraordinary fate. Martin is now awkward and abrupt; what will he be at Mr. Darcy acknowledged that the partridges
were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or three French
cooks at least. He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went away
an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and Mrs. I shall have many fellow-mourners for the ball, if not
for Frank Churchill; but Mr. “How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!”

He made no answer. Darcy’s letter, nor explain to her sister
how sincerely she had been valued by his friend. The couplet does not cease to be, nor does its
meaning change. So peculiarly the lady in it.—Just colour
enough for beauty.”

“I have always admired her complexion,” replied Emma, archly; “but do
not I remember the time when you found fault with her for being so
pale?—When we first began to talk of her.—Have you quite forgotten?”

“Oh! Oh! How it might be considered by the rest of the party, she could
not tell. Knightley and Jane Fairfax. Cole
said how much taste you had; and Mr. Quite thick shoes. Palmer. Churchill—‘Every sacrifice of mere
pleasure you will always find me ready to make to your convenience; but
I must go and see my father immediately. Bennet, for anything about the entail. “Aye, aye,” said Mrs. how can it affect them?”

“My dear Mr. He is
brother to Mrs. To Mr. I have been always used to a very small income,
and could struggle with any poverty for him; but I love him too well to
be the selfish means of robbing him, perhaps, of all that his mother
might give him if he married to please her. Bingley’s chaise to go to Meryton;
and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.”

“I had much rather go in the coach.”

“But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. I smile because you smile, and shall probably
suspect whatever I find you suspect; but at present I do not see what
there is to question. and Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. But if
I dared tell you all, you would not be so much surprised. “You are too hasty, sir,” she cried. Her wretchedness I could have borne, but her passion—her malice—At all
events it must be appeased. is this just? He was
exactly formed to engage Marianne’s heart, for with all this, he joined
not only a captivating person, but a natural ardour of mind which was
now roused and increased by the example of her own, and which
recommended him to her affection beyond every thing else. Had Elizabeth
been able to encounter his eyes, she might have seen how well the
expression of heartfelt delight diffused over his face became him: but
though she could not look she could listen; and he told her of feelings
which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his affection
every moment more valuable. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and
unvarying society.”

“But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be
observed in them for ever.”

“Yes, indeed,” cried Mrs. He had all the clearness and
quickness of mind which she wanted, and he could sometimes act an
ungracious, or say a severe thing. She hoped they might now become friends again. Of all houses in the kingdom Mrs. Bates—I will call upon her to-morrow, and take my children.—They are
always so pleased to see my children.—And that excellent Miss
Bates!—such thorough worthy people!—How are they, sir?”

“Why, pretty well, my dear, upon the whole. And the distinction is not quite so much
against the candour and common sense of the world as appears at first;
for a very narrow income has a tendency to contract the mind, and sour
the temper. He therefore replied, without any resentment,

“I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours,
madam. Brandon,” said
Marianne, eagerly, “will it not be sufficient?”

He shook his head. Woodhouse’s party could be made
up in the evening without him, or whether he should be in the smallest
degree necessary at Hartfield. He and Mrs. “You quite mistook Mr. she
is absolutely charming! Weston
again, and again, and again, you see. She must not flatter herself that he
thought of her dancing, but if he were criticising her behaviour, she
did not feel afraid. One natural
consequence of the evil she had involved herself in,” she said, “was
that of making her _unreasonable_. Is nothing due to the man whom we
have all such reason to love, and no reason in the world to think ill
of? Philip Elton, White-Hart, Bath_, was to be seen under the operation of
being lifted into the butcher’s cart, which was to convey it to where
the coaches past; and every thing in this world, excepting that trunk
and the direction, was consequently a blank. Wickham, after a few moments,
touched his hat--a salutation which Mr. Are you lost to every feeling of
propriety and delicacy? You could not have met with a person more capable of
giving you certain information on that head than myself--for I have been
connected with his family, in a particular manner, from my infancy.”

Elizabeth could not but look surprised. Mr. Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth’s performance, mixing
with them many instructions on execution and taste. think a farmer, (and with all his sense and all
his merit Mr. He may be sure of every woman’s
approbation while he writes with such gallantry.”

“I have no hesitation in saying,” replied Mr. She was rather low all the evening, but
Emma could allow for her amiable regrets, and sometimes relieved them
by speaking of her own affection, sometimes by bringing forward the
idea of Mr. If it was
not for the entail, I should not mind it.”

“What should not you mind?”

“I should not mind anything at all.”

“Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such
insensibility.”

“I never can be thankful, Mr. “I did not think Caroline in spirits,” were her words, “but she was very
glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming
to London. Her mind was in a
state of flutter and wonder, which made it impossible for her to be
collected. “I thought you meant to go with me. He danced only four
dances! She now found
that she had erred in relying on Elinor’s representation of herself;
and justly concluded that every thing had been expressly softened at
the time, to spare her from an increase of unhappiness, suffering as
she then had suffered for Marianne. Every thing in her
household arrangements was conducted on the most liberal plan, and
excepting a few old city friends, whom, to Lady Middleton’s regret, she
had never dropped, she visited no one to whom an introduction could at
all discompose the feelings of her young companions. Churchill. She was
not yet dancing; she was working her way up from the bottom, and had
therefore leisure to look around, and by only turning her head a little
she saw it all. Bingley likes,” said her mother,
resentfully, “since we are not to visit.”

“But you forget, mamma,” said Elizabeth, “that we shall meet him at the
assemblies, and that Mrs. Emma’s spirits were mounted quite up to happiness; every thing wore a
different air; James and his horses seemed not half so sluggish as
before. The expense would
be nothing, the inconvenience not more; and it was altogether an
attention which the delicacy of his conscience pointed out to be
requisite to its complete enfranchisement from his promise to his
father. The next morning produced no abatement in these happy symptoms. It was
unpardonable. Most comfortable carriage.—Oh! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of him in
those points where he most wants care. It is time for us to be
going indeed. What a thinking brain you
have! A man must pay for his convenience; and it
_has_ cost me a vast deal of money.”

“More than you think it really and intrinsically worth.”

“Why, I hope not that. The confession completely renewed her first shame—and the sight of
Harriet’s tears made her think that she should never be in charity with
herself again. She has the
reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe
she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from
her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride of her nephew, who
chooses that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of
the first class.”

Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and
they continued talking together with mutual satisfaction till supper put
an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr. By whom can he have been
instigated?”

“By all the world, rather than by his own heart. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their
father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a
twelve-month’s abode in the family might have prompted. Let me entreat you, Miss Woodhouse, to exercise so charming a talent in
favour of your friend. A variety of evils crossed his mind. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to
invite him to sit by herself. There was no want of discourse. Emma, in good spirits too, from the amusement afforded her mind by the
expectation of Mr. I am sure I have not got one half so good.”

“Leave out the two last lines, and there is no reason why you should
not write it into your book.”

“Oh! She was sensible that you had never
received any proper acknowledgment from herself.”

“If I did not know her to be happy now,” said Emma, seriously, “which,
in spite of every little drawback from her scrupulous conscience, she
must be, I could not bear these thanks;—for, oh! It was a dislike so little just—every imputed fault was so magnified by
fancy, that she never saw Jane Fairfax the first time after any
considerable absence, without feeling that she had injured her; and
now, when the due visit was paid, on her arrival, after a two years’
interval, she was particularly struck with the very appearance and
manners, which for those two whole years she had been depreciating. Willoughby
wanted particularly to show me the place; and it is a charming house, I
assure you.—There is one remarkably pretty sitting room up stairs; of a
nice comfortable size for constant use, and with modern furniture it
would be delightful. “We must go,” said Sir John.—“It shall not be put off when we are so
near it. He would then have suffered
under the pecuniary distresses which, because they are removed, he now
reckons as nothing. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery
     and corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be
     found. He heard her with the most earnest attention, but seeming to recollect
himself, said no more on the subject, and began directly to speak of
his pleasure at seeing them in London, making the usual inquiries about
their journey, and the friends they had left behind. Escape, however, was not his plan. She has not the least idea.”

Mrs. Pleased to find
herself more comfortably situated in that particular than she had
expected, Elinor was very willing to compound for the want of much real
enjoyment from any of their evening parties, which, whether at home or
abroad, formed only for cards, could have little to amuse her. Dashwood,
his hand passed so directly before her, as to make a ring, with a plait
of hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of his fingers. She did not
mean to have her own affections entangled again, and it would be
incumbent on her to avoid any encouragement of his. I give you credit for it. She performed her part,
indeed, without much graciousness, but Mrs. Do not be overpowered by such a little
tribute of admiration. Emma soon saw that her companion was not in the happiest humour. Goddard, if not Mrs. Did you not think him dreadful
low-spirited when he was at Barton? In my heart I feel
little—scarcely any doubt of his preference. Bingley will not be detained in London by
them.”

“Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into
Hertfordshire this winter. Perry. Dashwood’s visit to Lady Middleton took place the next day, and
two of her daughters went with her; but Marianne excused herself from
being of the party, under some trifling pretext of employment; and her
mother, who concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby the
night before of calling on her while they were absent, was perfectly
satisfied with her remaining at home. Emma’s confusion, and the acknowledged intimacy, seemed
to declare her affection engaged. Her nerves were under continual irritation and
suffering; and by the ten days’ end, her nephew’s letter to Randalls
communicated a change of plan. But Sir John’s satisfaction
in society was much more real; he delighted in collecting about him
more young people than his house would hold, and the noisier they were
the better was he pleased. Perry. “Yet why did he come?”

She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to
him she had hardly courage to speak. Is this to be endured? On the contrary, her plans and proceedings were more and more
justified and endeared to her by the general appearances of the next
few days. She recommended it to her daughters, therefore, by all means
not to shorten their visit to Mrs. Bennet.’--“My mind, however, is now
     made up on the subject; for, having received ordination at Easter,
     I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of
     the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis
     de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the
     valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest
     endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her
     Ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies
     which are instituted by the Church of England. The families who had been in town for the winter
came back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Having never even fancied herself in
love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment, and from
her age and disposition, greater steadiness than first attachments often
boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to
every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the
feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the indulgence of those
regrets which must have been injurious to her own health and their
tranquillity. Her sensibility was potent enough! I could very ill be
spared—but such a point had been made of my coming! “I have not the pleasure of understanding you,” said he, when she had
finished her speech. Martin—he might have Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at
backgammon. Churchill probably has not health or spirits like Selina to enjoy
that sort of seclusion. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr. Elton is a very good sort of man,
and a very respectable vicar of Highbury, but not at all likely to make
an imprudent match. Darcy asked why he did not marry your sister at once. I never can be blameless. Jennings, that
they should both attend her on such a visit, Elinor had some difficulty
in persuading her sister to go, for still she had seen nothing of
Willoughby; and therefore was not more indisposed for amusement abroad,
than unwilling to run the risk of his calling again in her absence. One cannot love a reserved person.”

“Not till the reserve ceases towards oneself; and then the attraction
may be the greater. She has been doing
everything in her power, by thinking and talking on the subject, to give
greater--what shall I call it?--susceptibility to her feelings; which
are naturally lively enough. He was
very much vexed. Weston and Mrs. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XII. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best
living in his gift. “I will go to Meryton,” said she, “as soon as I am dressed, and tell the
good, good news to my sister Philips. It should not, must not be a struggle.”

Mrs. I could not think about you so much
without doating on you, faults and all; and by dint of fancying so many
errors, have been in love with you ever since you were thirteen at
least.”

“I am sure you were of use to me,” cried Emma. The continuance of their engagement, and the
means that were able to be taken for promoting its end, was all her
communication; and this produced from Mrs. yes—very—a very pleasing young woman.”

“I think her beautiful, quite beautiful.”

“Very nicely dressed, indeed; a remarkably elegant gown.”

“I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love.”

“Oh! “Mrs. But
at least it shows that _she_ was serious in the object of her journey. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he
suddenly addressed her with,--

“I hope Mr. But, then, if Mrs. She was as happy as possible with the Martins in the summer. “And Sir John too,” cried the elder sister, “what a charming man he
is!”

Here too, Miss Dashwood’s commendation, being only simple and just,
came in without any eclat. _We_ must begin; we must go and pay wedding
visit very soon.”

“My dear, how am I to get so far? Weston whisper to his wife, “He has asked
her, my dear. Mr. “To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be no possibility of
objection,--all loveliness and goodness as she is! Goddard’s door, when she was met by
Mr. He wrote last week to hurry my return.”

[Illustration:

“Dawson”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Oh, your father, of course, may spare you, if your mother can. Goddard’s school was in high repute—and very deservedly; for Highbury
was reckoned a particularly healthy spot: she had an ample house and
garden, gave the children plenty of wholesome food, let them run about
a great deal in the summer, and in winter dressed their chilblains with
her own hands. Knightley, with a smile which implied a conviction of some part of what
had passed between them. Benevolent, philanthropic man! She had
not advanced many yards from Mrs. Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. Dashwood probably found the same explanation. She found it difficult to obtain even a word from
her beyond a monosyllable. [Illustration]




CHAPTER X. It must be done directly; it must be done in London;
the order must go through the hands of some intelligent person whose
taste could be depended on; and Isabella, the usual doer of all
commissions, must not be applied to, because it was December, and Mr. I want to talk very seriously. If you know it
already, as surely you must, I may be spared.”

“You mean,” answered Elinor, with forced calmness, “Mr. Elinor, though she felt really interested in the welfare of Colonel
Brandon, could not bestow all the wonder on his going so suddenly away,
which Mrs. But I am quite in the
minority, I believe; few people seem to value simplicity of dress,—show
and finery are every thing. What shall we do to
rouse them? Compare Mr. I would keep a pack of
foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day.”

“Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought,” said Mrs. And to have entered into a secret engagement with a young man under her
uncle’s care, the son of a woman especially of such very large fortune
as Mrs. Gardiner, “I begin to be of your uncle’s
opinion. Come, sir, pray let me
hear it.”

“I doubt its being very clever myself,” said Mr. I never could comprehend how Mr. CHAPTER XVI


The hair was curled, and the maid sent away, and Emma sat down to think
and be miserable.—It was a wretched business indeed!—Such an overthrow
of every thing she had been wishing for!—Such a development of every
thing most unwelcome!—Such a blow for Harriet!—that was the worst of
all. I think your
manners to him encouraging. It was at Sir William Lucas’s, where a large party were
assembled. Churchill’s removal to London had been of no
service to the wilful or nervous part of her disorder. Caroline did not return my visit till yesterday;
     and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the meantime. I am only resolved to act in that manner,
which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without
reference to _you_, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.”

“It is well. yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaintance. She thought nothing of his attachment,
and was insulted by his hopes. I suppose you have not so
many in this part of the world; for my part, I think they are a vast
addition always.”

“But why should you think,” said Lucy, looking ashamed of her sister,
“that there are not as many genteel young men in Devonshire as Sussex?”

“Nay, my dear, I’m sure I don’t pretend to say that there an’t. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.”

“We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Highbury, the large and populous village, almost amounting to a town,
to which Hartfield, in spite of its separate lawn, and shrubberies, and
name, did really belong, afforded her no equals. The looking over his letter again, in replying to it, had
such a softening tendency, that it was particularly necessary to brace
her up with a few decisive expressions; and she was so very much
concerned at the idea of making him unhappy, and thought so much of
what his mother and sisters would think and say, and was so anxious
that they should not fancy her ungrateful, that Emma believed if the
young man had come in her way at that moment, he would have been
accepted after all. One thing _did_ disturb her; and of that she made her daily complaint. You ought all to have learned. Darcy had brought
with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle, Lord ----;
and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. He was always to have gone on
Saturday, and to Saturday he still meant to stay. She felt that Jane’s feelings, though
fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant
complacency in her air and manner, not often united with great
sensibility. She longed to
speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs. Man’s boasted power and freedom, all are flown. Perry, that it had not made him ill. Darcy, however, should
have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations was bad enough; and
she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or
the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable. Half an hour passed away, and the favourable symptom yet blessed her. Mr. She absolutely
refused to allow me, which I then thought most unreasonable. Jennings could not
quit Cleveland during the Dashwoods’ stay; and Colonel Brandon was soon
brought, by their united request, to consider his own abode there as
equally determinate, if not equally indispensable. Woodhouse recommend a baked apple. Catherine, weak-spirited,
irritable, and completely under Lydia’s guidance, had been always
affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would
scarcely give them a hearing. Nonsense, how can you talk so! Woodhouse’s visits, Emma having it in view that
her gentle reasonings should be employed in the cause, resolved first
to announce it at home, and then at Randalls.—But how to break it to
her father at last!—She had bound herself to do it, in such an hour of
Mr. Her father—and Harriet. In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying
Colonel Fitzwilliam. Weston must be quiet, and every thing deliberately
arranged. dear, Kingston—are you?—Mrs. He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone
should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law; and he
was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance,
and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could. As Frank Churchill’s arrival had succeeded Mr. Mark’s Place, Venice, when Frank
Churchill entered the room. I know it all; that the young man’s marrying her was a
patched-up business, at the expense of your father and uncle. there I am—thinking of him directly. For such an attachment
as this, she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not
suppose Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement, without the
intention of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither
her virtue nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy
prey. Mr. Even
if this family, the Braithwaites, are put off, I am still afraid that
some excuse may be found for disappointing us. Elton’s spirits for other feelings. “Nay, why do you?”

“Me!—I suppose I smile for pleasure at Colonel Campbell’s being so rich
and so liberal.—It is a handsome present.”

“Very.”

“I rather wonder that it was never made before.”

“Perhaps Miss Fairfax has never been staying here so long before.”

“Or that he did not give her the use of their own instrument—which must
now be shut up in London, untouched by any body.”

“That is a grand pianoforte, and he might think it too large for Mrs. Bennet, and prepared
for backgammon. I have had
to contend against the unkindness of his sister, and the insolence of
his mother; and have suffered the punishment of an attachment, without
enjoying its advantages. Mrs. But this is no excuse for their concealing it from us.”

“Concealing it from us! Weston had
foreseen, before she had the power of forming some opinion of Frank
Churchill’s feelings. Every
circumstance belonging to him was interesting. What am I to do?”

“I am here on no business of my own,” said Emma; “I am only waiting for
my friend. Compare their
manner of carrying themselves; of walking; of speaking; of being
silent. Frank
Churchill?—Ah! Ferrars; but Elinor could not learn whether her sons were to
be of the party. Nothing
occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been
fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they
had yet learnt to care for at a ball. Mrs. There
must be ample room in it for every real comfort. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s good opinion,
because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?”

But Elizabeth had now recollected herself; and, making a strong effort
for it, was able to assure her, with tolerable firmness, that the
prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she
wished her all imaginable happiness. Jennings, knowing
nothing of any change in the patient, went unusually early to bed; her
maid, who was one of the principal nurses, was recreating herself in
the housekeeper’s room, and Elinor remained alone with Marianne. Elton looked all happiness at this proposition; and nothing could
exceed his alertness and attention in conducting them into his house
and endeavouring to make every thing appear to advantage. You _are_ a gentleman’s daughter. I speak
feelingly. Wickham had resolved
on quitting the militia. She had already repeated her own history to Elinor
three or four times; and had Elinor’s memory been equal to her means of
improvement, she might have known very early in their acquaintance all
the particulars of Mr. Collins! he has done for himself completely,—shut himself out for
ever from all decent society! They were soon gone again, rising from
their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and
hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. That would have
been too dreadful!—What an escape!—Dear Miss Woodhouse, I would not
give up the pleasure and honour of being intimate with you for any
thing in the world.”

“Indeed, Harriet, it would have been a severe pang to lose you; but it
must have been. The
situation of your mother’s family, though objectionable, was nothing in
comparison of that total want of propriety so frequently, so almost
uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and
occasionally even by your father:--pardon me,--it pains me to offend
you. She is the natural daughter of
nobody knows whom, with probably no settled provision at all, and
certainly no respectable relations. Mrs. “Do you dare say this?” cried Mr. _Your_
retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment
arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of
ignorance. Bingley was all grateful
pleasure; and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of
waiting on her after his return from London, whither he was obliged to
go the next day for a short time. We must bring her forward. Woodhouse to cards. Among the
rest there was one for Colonel Brandon;—he took it, looked at the
direction, changed colour, and immediately left the room. Who would
have thought of my meeting with--perhaps--a nephew of Lady Catherine de
Bourgh in this assembly! I do not like ruined, tattered cottages. In her earnest meditations on the contents of the letter, on the
depravity of that mind which could dictate it, and probably, on the
very different mind of a very different person, who had no other
connection whatever with the affair than what her heart gave him with
every thing that passed, Elinor forgot the immediate distress of her
sister, forgot that she had three letters on her lap yet unread, and so
entirely forgot how long she had been in the room, that when on hearing
a carriage drive up to the door, she went to the window to see who
could be coming so unreasonably early, she was all astonishment to
perceive Mrs. It is what we happily have never known any
thing of; but it must be a life of misery. The latter was much more
agreeable than his companion expected. And it was entirely for _her_
sake, and upon _her_ account, that he said a word about being off, and
not upon his own. Palmer?”

Mr. A gentleman carrying a gun, with two pointers playing round him, was
passing up the hill and within a few yards of Marianne, when her
accident happened. Gardiner’s
former residence, and where she had lately learned that some
acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen
all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of
Lambton, Elizabeth found, from her aunt, that Pemberley was situated. Bennet’s schemes for this day were ineffectual. Mr. Could he expect that her friends
would not step forward? Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn
would come in the evening. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention. Frank Churchill talked a great
deal about your taste, and that he valued taste much more than
execution.”

“Ah! CHAPTER XVI


It was a very great relief to Emma to find Harriet as desirous as
herself to avoid a meeting. So I would advise you two, to set off for
town, when you are tired of Barton, without saying a word to Miss
Dashwood about it.”

“Nay,” cried Mrs. He repeated the question, with some
surprise at her silence. No more is
Emma. If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act
     in your name throughout the whole of this business, I will
     immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper
     settlement. Perhaps I may sometimes have felt that Harriet would not forget what
was due—or rather what would be kind by me.”

This appeal to her affections did more than all the rest. good Mr. What! “But I,”
he soon added, “who have had no such charm thrown over my senses, must
still see, hear, and remember. Perry passed by on
horseback. And yet it is not very unlikely.”

“Is Mr. Every thing that I have said or done, for many weeks past, has
been with the sole view of marking my adoration of yourself. She shewed it to me. Jane she had a distinct glimpse
of, looking extremely ill; and, before the door had shut them out, she
heard Miss Bates saying, “Well, my dear, I shall _say_ you are laid
down upon the bed, and I am sure you are ill enough.”

Poor old Mrs. Emma could imagine she saw a touch of the arm at this speech, from his
wife. The dread
of such a failure after all became the prominent uneasiness; and when
Harriet appeared, and in very good spirits, and without having any such
reason to give for her long absence, she felt a satisfaction which
settled her with her own mind, and convinced her, that let Mr. To understand, thoroughly understand her own heart, was the first
endeavour. He had wanted very much
to go abroad—had been very eager indeed to be allowed to travel—but she
would not hear of it. Elton was only too happy. Frank Churchill—must put
up for the present with Jane Fairfax, who could bring only the
freshness of a two years’ absence. and Mrs. No,
it was long enough, broad enough, handsome enough. I can hardly write for
     laughing. My poor mother
is really ill, and keeps her room. This is meeting quite in
fairy-land!—Such a transformation!—Must not compliment, I know (eyeing
Emma most complacently)—that would be rude—but upon my word, Miss
Woodhouse, you do look—how do you like Jane’s hair?—You are a
judge.—She did it all herself. Weston and her son-in-law; they were walking into
Highbury;—to Hartfield of course. Their favour increased; they could
not be spared; Sir John would not hear of their going; and in spite of
their numerous and long arranged engagements in Exeter, in spite of the
absolute necessity of returning to fulfill them immediately, which was
in full force at the end of every week, they were prevailed on to stay
nearly two months at the park, and to assist in the due celebration of
that festival which requires a more than ordinary share of private
balls and large dinners to proclaim its importance. The feelings
of the person who wrote and the person who received it are now so widely
different from what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance
attending it ought to be forgotten. The
town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where
they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of
her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,
Dovedale, or the Peak. It was as much, however, as was desired, and more than was expected, by
Edward and Elinor; and Mrs. “I remember last Christmas at a little hop at the park, he
danced from eight o’clock till four, without once sitting down.”

“Did he indeed?” cried Marianne with sparkling eyes, “and with
elegance, with spirit?”

“Yes; and he was up again at eight to ride to covert.”

“That is what I like; that is what a young man ought to be. Not that Marianne
appeared to distrust the truth of any part of it, for she listened to
it all with the most steady and submissive attention, made neither
objection nor remark, attempted no vindication of Willoughby, and
seemed to show by her tears that she felt it to be impossible. Poor little creatures, how unhappy she would
have made them!”

Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs. Among such friends, however, and such flattery, he
did revive. But, however, he did not. Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury, and longed to dance again;
and the last half-hour of an evening which Mr. “I wish I could call her amiable. The excellence of his understanding and his
principles can be concealed only by that shyness which too often keeps
him silent. Mr. She always travels with her own sheets;
an excellent precaution. At length Lucy exclaimed with
a deep sigh,

“I believe it would be the wisest way to put an end to the business at
once by dissolving the engagement. How well
it sounds! This happened
the night before last. Bates’s house.”

“You may _say_ what you chuse—but your countenance testifies that your
_thoughts_ on this subject are very much like mine.”

“I do not know. I shall now live solely for my family. I have explained it to myself in the most satisfactory way;—but
you, Elinor, who love to doubt where you can—it will not satisfy _you_,
I know; but you shall not talk _me_ out of my trust in it. His companions
suggested only what could palliate imprudence, or smooth objections;
and by the time they had talked it all over together, and he had talked
it all over again with Emma, in their walk back to Hartfield, he was
become perfectly reconciled, and not far from thinking it the very best
thing that Frank could possibly have done. And now to chuse the
mortification of Mrs. Jennings soon came in. Long told me last night that he
sat close to her for half an hour without once opening his lips.”

[Illustration: “Without once opening his lips”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Are you quite sure, ma’am? I felt a
little uneasy--a little fearful of my sister’s happiness with him in
marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite
right. Hers, for me, was, I believe, fervent as the
attachment of your sister to Mr. For your
sake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no
occasion for entailing estates from the female line. A doubt of her regard, supposing him to feel it, need not
give him more than inquietude. “He
wrote a letter to poor Mrs. Robert Ferrars!” was repeated by Marianne and her mother in an
accent of the utmost amazement; and though Elinor could not speak, even
_her_ eyes were fixed on him with the same impatient wonder. Mrs. Collins’s conversation
to herself. She instantly begged
her sister would entreat Lady Middleton to take them home, as she was
too miserable to stay a minute longer. “No, indeed, it is not.”

“Well, then, I know who it is from, Colonel. He has given in all his debts; I
hope at least he has not deceived us. Had they been
only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his
discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment arrived, that
moment alighted from his horse or his carriage. I
am very little able—Have you a chair, ma’am? Mrs. “Perhaps it is as well,” said Frank Churchill, as he attended Emma to
her carriage. She got up with a
headache, was unable to talk, and unwilling to take any nourishment;
giving pain every moment to her mother and sisters, and forbidding all
attempt at consolation from either. Lord! Dashwood, from foreseeing at first
as a probable event, had brought herself to expect as a certain one. My courage always rises with every attempt to
intimidate me.”

“I shall not say that you are mistaken,” he replied, “because you could
not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I
have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know, that you
find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which, in fact,
are not your own.”

Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to
Colonel Fitzwilliam, “Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of
me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. And it is such a
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said a
word about it till now.”

“Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,” said Mr. Jennings might have had
enough to do in spreading that knowledge farther, without seeking after
more, she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfort and
inquiry to her cousins as soon as she could; and nothing but the
hindrance of more visitors than usual, had prevented her going to them
within that time. She looked down the Randalls road. Jennings, “we might see whether it could be put off or not.”

“You would not be six hours later,” said Willoughby, “if you were to
defer your journey till our return.”

“I cannot afford to lose _one_ hour.”

Elinor then heard Willoughby say, in a low voice to Marianne, “There
are some people who cannot bear a party of pleasure. I suppose she had
nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?”

Elizabeth was forced to give in to a little falsehood here; for to
acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible. “How d’ ye do?—how d’ye do?—Very well, I thank you. Mr. I wish Jane Fairfax very well; but she
tires me to death.”

They were now approaching the cottage, and all idle topics were
superseded. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and
dependence.”

“In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of
either. Elinor’s uneasiness was at least equal to her mother’s. and Mrs. She had not time to know how Mr. He replied, and was again
silent. I will only add, God bless you. “His character is now before you; expensive, dissipated, and worse than
both. I hope whenever poor Isabella’s little ones have the
measles, she will send for Perry.”

“My father and Mrs. She hesitated a moment, and then replied, “With you, if you will ask
me.”

“Will you?” said he, offering his hand. A bride, you know, must appear like
a bride, but my natural taste is all for simplicity; a simple style of
dress is so infinitely preferable to finery. Weston were obliged to be
almost always either talking together or silent together. I know very little of Dorsetshire;
but, my dear Elinor, I shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it;
and I think I can answer for your having Fanny and myself among the
earliest and best pleased of your visitors.”

Elinor tried very seriously to convince him that there was no
likelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon; but it was an expectation
of too much pleasure to himself to be relinquished, and he was really
resolved on seeking an intimacy with that gentleman, and promoting the
marriage by every possible attention. Woodhouse very soon
followed them into the drawing-room. You do not think I could mean _you_, or suppose Mr. Woodhouse thought it no hardship for
either James or the horses. That
he should never have been able to indulge so amiable a feeling before,
passed suspiciously through Emma’s brain; but still, if it were a
falsehood, it was a pleasant one, and pleasantly handled. Emma continued,

“I have not said, exert yourself Harriet for my sake; think less, talk
less of Mr. What in a
situation like mine, but a most shamefully unguarded affection could
expose me to—”

“How then,” asked her sister, “would you account for his behaviour?”

“I would suppose him,—Oh, how gladly would I suppose him, only fickle,
very, very fickle.”

Elinor said no more. Unless the elder brother is
very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.”

He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. She was sitting by Mr. My feelings will not be
repressed. Sometimes he won’t speak to me for half a day together, and then he
comes out with something so droll—all about any thing in the world.”

She surprised Elinor very much as they returned into the drawing-room,
by asking her whether she did not like Mr. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?”

“Perfectly so, I thank you.”

She found that she was to receive no other answer; and, after a short
pause, added,--

“I think I have understood that Mr. How would he bear to have Miss
Bates belonging to him?—To have her haunting the Abbey, and thanking
him all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane?—‘So very kind
and obliging!—But he always had been such a very kind neighbour!’ And
then fly off, through half a sentence, to her mother’s old petticoat. She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation
between Wickham and herself in their first evening at Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Mrs. The forgiveness,
at first, indeed, as was reasonable, comprehended only Robert; and
Lucy, who had owed his mother no duty and therefore could have
transgressed none, still remained some weeks longer unpardoned. My dear, dear
Lydia! She
will not even listen to your questions. Bennet made no answer. “I see what you are feeling,” replied Charlotte; “you must be surprised,
very much surprised, so lately as Mr. “I have never been able,” continued Lucy, “to give him my picture in
return, which I am very much vexed at, for he has been always so
anxious to get it! And here I can
admit, that my manners to Miss W., in being unpleasant to Miss F., were
highly blameable. Captain Weston was a general favourite; and when the chances of his
military life had introduced him to Miss Churchill, of a great
Yorkshire family, and Miss Churchill fell in love with him, nobody was
surprized, except her brother and his wife, who had never seen him, and
who were full of pride and importance, which the connexion would
offend. The cruelty of Mrs. Its completion depended on others. He dared not come to Bartlett’s Buildings for fear of
detection, and though their mutual impatience to meet, was not to be
told, they could do nothing at present but write. Bennet; “and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle
directly.”

The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she
would; and the argument ended only with the visit. But Mr. E.’s,
I had a great curiosity. But poor Harriet could not follow. But she had an almost instant doubt of his caring for her as he
had done, of his feeling the same tenderness in the same degree. He is rich, to be
sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how
little Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish and
fearing she was indisposed. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;
Jane certainly could not come back. But
     it was two or three days before he could get from her what he
     wanted. Preparation! I should have made a good likeness of her, if she
would have sat longer, but she was in such a hurry to have me draw her
four children that she would not be quiet. CHAPTER XVII


Mr. Weston must
already be perfectly aware, it was not worth bringing forward again:—it
could not be done without a reproof to him, which would be giving pain
to his wife; and she found herself therefore obliged to consent to an
arrangement which she would have done a great deal to avoid; an
arrangement which would probably expose her even to the degradation of
being said to be of Mrs. I certainly have been misunderstanding you, if you
feel in doubt as to the _purport_ of your answer. Full
of thanks, and full of news, Miss Bates knew not which to give
quickest. ‘The lock of hair, (repeating it from the letter,)
which you so obligingly bestowed on me’—That is unpardonable. “I hope,” added Mrs. You see I cannot leave Mrs. Gratifying, however, and stimulative as was the letter in the material
part, its sentiments, she yet found, when it was folded up and returned
to Mrs. It was a
painful, but not an improbable, conjecture. Perhaps I am not doing her justice. The great Mrs. And so I shall always say, my dear, you may depend on it. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane
in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. If she can hesitate as to ‘Yes,’ she ought to say ‘No’
directly. She paused over it for some time with indignant astonishment; then read
it again and again; but every perusal only served to increase her
abhorrence of the man, and so bitter were her feelings against him,
that she dared not trust herself to speak, lest she might wound
Marianne still deeper by treating their disengagement, not as a loss to
her of any possible good but as an escape from the worst and most
irremediable of all evils, a connection, for life, with an unprincipled
man, as a deliverance the most real, a blessing the most important. I was sure you loved your girls too well to
neglect such an acquaintance. Then the baked apples came home,
Mrs. I am very happy. For then his
brother’s bow must have given the finishing stroke to what the
ill-humour of his mother and sister would have begun. Comparisons would
occur—regrets would arise; and her joy, though sincere as her love for
her sister, was of a kind to give her neither spirits nor language. You would not think it to look at him, but
he is bilious—Mr. “Dear Mrs. Woodhouse, who had previously made up his
mind to walk out, was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it, and
was induced by the entreaties of both, though against the scruples of
his own civility, to leave Mr. To her it was real enjoyment to be with the Westons. Darcy could have
such boundless influence. “Yes, oh! You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I
went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. I believe I was
half an hour this morning shut up with my housekeeper.”

“But every thing of that kind,” said Emma, “will soon be in so regular
a train—”

“Well,” said Mrs. But, however, he is very welcome to come to
Netherfield, if he likes it. Suckling’s seat;”—a comparison of Hartfield to Maple Grove. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Weston
any letter about her to produce?” No, she had heard from him very
lately, but having answered the letter, had put it away. Miss
Woodhouse, what can we do about that?”

“Leave it to me. Their departure took place in the first week in January. Sir John Middleton, who called on them every day for the first
fortnight, and who was not in the habit of seeing much occupation at
home, could not conceal his amazement on finding them always employed. I have already met with such success in two applications for
pardon, that I may be in danger of thinking myself too sure of yours,
and of those among your friends who have had any ground of offence.—You
must all endeavour to comprehend the exact nature of my situation when
I first arrived at Randalls; you must consider me as having a secret
which was to be kept at all hazards. How
much of pleasure or pain it was in his power to bestow! The house belonged to people in business. But there was much to be talked of, in marrying her; and the
good-natured wishes for her well-doing, which had proceeded before from
all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton, lost but little of their spirit
in this change of circumstances, because with such a husband her misery
was considered certain. Elton
must smile less, and Mr. Without a governess, you must
have been neglected.”

“Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as
wished to learn never wanted the means. CHAPTER XXXI. Then, and then only, under
such a roof, I might perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have been at
Barton.”

“I flatter myself,” replied Elinor, “that even under the disadvantage
of better rooms and a broader staircase, you will hereafter find your
own house as faultless as you now do this.”

“There certainly are circumstances,” said Willoughby, “which might
greatly endear it to me; but this place will always have one claim of
my affection, which no other can possibly share.”

Mrs. We must go in the carriage,
to be sure.”

“The carriage! I wonder he should be so improvident in
a point of such common, such natural, concern! But here he was set right by Mrs. He is the curate of the parish I dare say.”

“No, _that_ he is not. He came, examined his patient, and though encouraging Miss Dashwood to
expect that a very few days would restore her sister to health, yet, by
pronouncing her disorder to have a putrid tendency, and allowing the
word “infection” to pass his lips, gave instant alarm to Mrs. But I wonder how long you
_would_ have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went
to a window to enjoy its prospect. “For my own part,” said he, “I am excessively fond of a cottage; there
is always so much comfort, so much elegance about them. Bennet still up. Marianne could never love by halves; and her
whole heart became, in time, as much devoted to her husband, as it had
once been to Willoughby. Knightley and Emma settled it in a few brief sentences: thus—

“Your father will not be easy; why do not you go?”

“I am ready, if the others are.”

“Shall I ring the bell?”

“Yes, do.”

And the bell was rung, and the carriages spoken for. The acquaintance at present had no charm for her. and Mrs. I do admire your patriotism. Do not mimic her. He gave me a quiet hint; I told him he was mistaken;
he asked my pardon and said no more. Why does not Perry see her?”

Emma, who was not really at all frightened herself, tranquillised this
excess of apprehension by assurances of Mrs. It inspired little
more than an animating curiosity. You have cured her of her school-girl’s
giggle; she really does you credit.”

“Thank you. Elton should close it. She knew how little
such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to
advantage. Let me mend it for you. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and
roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine’s behaviour was most
friendly and obliging. In such circumstances,
it was better for both that they should not be long together; and the
restless state of Marianne’s mind not only prevented her from remaining
in the room a moment after she was dressed, but requiring at once
solitude and continual change of place, made her wander about the house
till breakfast time, avoiding the sight of every body. no, now I recollect, now I have it; something
happened before tea, but not that. my dear father,” she cried, “come back and write immediately. How soon he had walked himself into the proper resolution, however, how
soon an opportunity of exercising it occurred, in what manner he
expressed himself, and how he was received, need not be particularly
told. Woodhouse was to be
talked into an acquiescence of his daughter’s going out to dinner on a
day now near at hand, and spending the whole evening away from him. While he was so dull, it was no wonder that Harriet
should be dull likewise; and they were both insufferable. After making every possible
inquiry on that side of London, Colonel F. After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to
admire the view, Mr. I am sure she will be here presently.”

Emma seriously hoped she would. CHAPTER XLIV. “Oh, Lord! Do not let me lose it. But here, Elinor could
neither wonder nor blame; and when she saw, as she assisted Marianne
from the carriage, that she had been crying, she saw only an emotion
too natural in itself to raise any thing less tender than pity, and in
its unobtrusiveness entitled to praise. His words seemed to imply it. “My dear Harriet, you must not refine too much upon this charade.—You
will betray your feelings improperly, if you are too conscious and too
quick, and appear to affix more meaning, or even quite all the meaning
which may be affixed to it. After some attempts, therefore, to be permitted to
begin again, they were obliged to thank Mrs. I remember the time when I
liked a red coat myself very well--and, indeed, so I do still at my
heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year,
should want one of my girls, I shall not say nay to him; and I thought
Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William’s in
his regimentals.”

“Mamma,” cried Lydia, “my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain
Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson’s as they did when they first
came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke’s library.”

Mrs. She could not refuse to give him hers;—he pressed
it with affection. “Willoughby!” cried Sir John; “what, is _he_ in the country? I hope she will turn out well.”

“I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.”

“Did you go by the village of Kympton?”

“I do not recollect that we did.”

“I mention it because it is the living which I ought to have had. Pray assure him of it.”

Elinor’s astonishment at this commission could hardly have been
greater, had the Colonel been really making her an offer of his hand. When he gave his promise to his father, he meditated within himself to
increase the fortunes of his sisters by the present of a thousand
pounds a-piece. Ferrars, of Park Street, and brother of your
sister-in-law, Mrs. There was also a legacy of
one thousand pounds. Bingley’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly,
“but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. The reason why all this was to be done by him
     alone, was such as I have given above. Bragge went to London and back again with four
horses.”

“The evil of the distance from Enscombe,” said Mr. “A gentleman and a stranger! Between the two
eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a very particular regard. CHAPTER L. This was all that was generally known of her history. Bennet’s carriage was
to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman’s
punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room upstairs. I defy even Sir William Lucas
himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law.”

The loss of her daughter made Mrs. At this
moment whom are you thinking of?”

The symptoms were favourable.—Instead of answering, Harriet turned away
confused, and stood thoughtfully by the fire; and though the letter was
still in her hand, it was now mechanically twisted about without
regard. She would be never led into
temptation, nor left for it to find her out. My only scruple in advising the match was on
his account, as being beneath his deserts, and a bad connexion for him. His air and voice recovered their usual briskness: he
shook her heartily and gratefully by the hand, and entered on the
subject in a manner to prove, that he now only wanted time and
persuasion to think the engagement no very bad thing. We must not be so ready to fancy
ourselves intentionally injured. “I do not know when I have been more shocked,” said she. My father and
mother believe the worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. Collins’s proposal accepted with as
good a grace as she could. Could I mention any thing more fit to be
done, than to go to Mrs. Sir John called on them as soon as the next interval of fair weather
that morning allowed him to get out of doors; and Marianne’s accident
being related to him, he was eagerly asked whether he knew any
gentleman of the name of Willoughby at Allenham. I will only say, farther, that from what passed
that evening my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every
inducement heightened, which could have led me before to preserve my
friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy connection. The yeomanry are
precisely the order of people with whom I feel I can have nothing to
do. I am sure I do not know who is not.”

“Henry is a fine boy, but John is very like his mama. But never did she go without Mr. He had long made up his mind to Jane Fairfax’s
going out as governess, and could talk of it cheerfully, but Mr. Mrs. “You reside in Devonshire, I think,”—was his next observation, “in a
cottage near Dawlish.”

Elinor set him right as to its situation; and it seemed rather
surprising to him that anybody could live in Devonshire, without living
near Dawlish. CHAPTER XXXVI. He would not speak another word to him, meet him where he might, for
all the world! They must keep as much together
as they could;” and James was talked to, and given a charge to go very
slow and wait for the other carriage. Short of that, it
is all guess and luck—and will generally be ill-luck. Dashwood was sorry for what she had said; but it gave Elinor
pleasure, as it produced a reply from Marianne so expressive of
confidence in Willoughby and knowledge of his intentions. Don’t you, Mr. Frank Churchill did not come. I cannot conceive a situation more
deplorable. Miss Woodhouse, I hope nothing may happen to prevent the ball. Mr. Elinor gloried in his
integrity; and Marianne forgave all his offences in compassion for his
punishment. But the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, was
his only one twelvemonth. He could
hardly suppose I should neglect them. The hills
which surrounded the cottage terminated the valley in that direction;
under another name, and in another course, it branched out again
between two of the steepest of them. She had been graciously pleased to
approve of both the discourses which he had already had the honour of
preaching before her. I thought him very plain at
first, but I do not think him so plain now. CHAPTER III


Mr. Elton is going; dear Mrs. It was now the middle of June, and the weather fine; and Mrs. “No—I have never seen Mr. Darcy is over, I presume,” said Miss Bingley;
“and pray what is the result?”

“I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Ferrars is a very headstrong proud woman, and in her first fit of anger
upon hearing it, would very likely secure every thing to Robert, and
the idea of that, for Edward’s sake, frightens away all my inclination
for hasty measures.”

“And for your own sake too, or you are carrying your disinterestedness
beyond reason.”

Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent. John Knightley and
little John, and he followed with Miss Smith and Henry; and that at one
time they were in such a crowd, as to make Miss Smith rather uneasy.”

He stopped.—Emma dared not attempt any immediate reply. The business
was finished, and Harriet safe. Collins, who,
when I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he
pleases.”

“Oh, my dear,” cried his wife, “I cannot bear to hear that mentioned. Marianne, now looking dreadfully white, and unable to stand, sunk into
her chair, and Elinor, expecting every moment to see her faint, tried
to screen her from the observation of others, while reviving her with
lavender water. You must have seen that I did. After Emma had talked about it for
ten minutes, Mr. She soon resolved, equally as a duty and a pleasure, to employ half an
hour of this holiday of spirits in calling on Miss Fairfax.—She ought
to go—and she was longing to see her; the resemblance of their present
situations increasing every other motive of goodwill. Jennings was governed in it by an impulse of the utmost goodwill. It was owing to him, to his
     reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham’s character
     had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had been
     received and noticed as he was. The rest of his letter is only about his dear
Charlotte’s situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. Why could not he keep on quarrelling with you, as his father
did before him?”

“Why, indeed, he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that
head, as you will hear.”

     /* RIGHT “Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, _15th October_. gave them to understand that they were going to Gretna
Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that W. I think
Harriet is doing extremely well. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended
elopement; and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieving
and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father,
acknowledged the whole to me. Robert Ferrars. so much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of all the objections
which had made him prevent his friend’s marrying her sister, and which
must appear at least with equal force in his own case, was almost
incredible! What has he to
do with books? The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink,
and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. She has done with her son,—she cast him off
for ever, and has made all those over whom she had any influence, cast
him off likewise. Mrs. Before this time last year I assure you we had had a delightful
exploring party from Maple Grove to Kings Weston.”

“You had better explore to Donwell,” replied Mr. Oh! When she was only fifteen there was a gentleman at my
brother Gardiner’s in town so much in love with her, that my
sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away. He has seen a great deal of the world; has been
abroad, has read, and has a thinking mind. I am not at
all afraid. She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place
in her mind which Harriet had occupied. Bingley did
not do justice to his own disposition. Not unfrequently, through Emma’s persuasion, he had some of the
chosen and the best to dine with him: but evening parties were what he
preferred; and, unless he fancied himself at any time unequal to
company, there was scarcely an evening in the week in which Emma could
not make up a card-table for him. I never saw such fine
children in my life.—I declare I quite doat upon them already, and
indeed I am always distractedly fond of children.”

“I should guess so,” said Elinor, with a smile, “from what I have
witnessed this morning.”

“I have a notion,” said Lucy, “you think the little Middletons rather
too much indulged; perhaps they may be the outside of enough; but it is
so natural in Lady Middleton; and for my part, I love to see children
full of life and spirits; I cannot bear them if they are tame and
quiet.”

“I confess,” replied Elinor, “that while I am at Barton Park, I never
think of tame and quiet children with any abhorrence.”

A short pause succeeded this speech, which was first broken by Miss
Steele, who seemed very much disposed for conversation, and who now
said rather abruptly, “And how do you like Devonshire, Miss Dashwood? Under that peculiar sort of dry, blunt manner, I know you have the
warmest heart. I believe you did not
hear me telling the others in the drawing-room that we are expecting
Frank. Elton’s superiority had very ample acknowledgment. It was the delay of a great deal
of pleasure and parade. Mr. But it is all,
all too late now.”

“I am grieved, indeed,” cried Darcy: “grieved--shocked. Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter,
and impressive in her injunctions that she would not miss the
opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible,--advice which there
was every reason to believe would be attended to; and, in the clamorous
happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus
of her sisters were uttered without being heard. Collins, in describing the civility of Mr. This was Colonel Campbell, who had very highly regarded
Fairfax, as an excellent officer and most deserving young man; and
farther, had been indebted to him for such attentions, during a severe
camp-fever, as he believed had saved his life. There
was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachment on his
side—but no love. How it would affect Frank was among the earliest thoughts of both. Well, if they can be easy with an
estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. Collins’s admiration. They had begun to fail him before he
entered the house, and they were quite overcome by the captivating
manners of Mrs. If he _had another_ motive, I am sure it would never
     disgrace him. Weston, only half a mile from them, and a
Miss Taylor in the house; and with all her advantages, natural and
domestic, she was now in great danger of suffering from intellectual
solitude. Darcy.”

“No, indeed, I did not. He could not speak a word for full ten
minutes. It is Frank Churchill’s duty to pay this attention to his
father. Emma was sorry;—to have to pay civilities to a person she did not like
through three long months!—to be always doing more than she wished, and
less than she ought! Oh! Do
not let mine continue longer. I am rather proud of little George. I must order the
carriage. But though
everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him
by any sigh of repentance; and rather looked with wonder at her friend,
that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. Knightley really wished
to marry, you would not have him refrain on Henry’s account, a boy of
six years old, who knows nothing of the matter?”

“Yes, I would. He is going to Kingston. she
offered to forgive the past, if I would marry Eliza. Knightley saw no such passion, and of course
thought nothing of its effects; but she saw too much of it to feel a
doubt of its overcoming any hesitations that a reasonable prudence
might originally suggest; and more than a reasonable, becoming degree
of prudence, she was very sure did not belong to Mr. Elton was so near, that she heard every syllable of a dialogue
which just then took place between him and Mrs. [Illustration]

In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
next morning to her mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for
them in the course of the day. Mr. Can his most intimate friends be so
excessively deceived in him? Knightley and Mr. To give up one’s child! “Oh! And _she_ appears so truly good—there is
something so motherly and kind-hearted about her, that it wins upon one
directly. “_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.”

[Illustration:

“He came down to see the place”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

This was invitation enough. Mr. Wickham has
created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding
his real character. I am sure I had much rather hear you. The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so
soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be
safe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where
she felt herself to be right. She
certainly did not hate him. “I was at Norland about a month ago.”

“And how does dear, dear Norland look?” cried Marianne. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the
society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and
Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr. Bennet
wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. About this time the two Miss Steeles, lately arrived at their cousin’s
house in Bartlett’s Buildings, Holburn, presented themselves again
before their more grand relations in Conduit and Berkeley Streets; and
were welcomed by them all with great cordiality. John
Knightley came; but Mr. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr. Mrs. He certainly loved her. Dixon, I dare
say. When I look back
to the first time I saw him! Three months, she says so, positively, as I am going to have the
pleasure of reading to you. no, indeed.”




CHAPTER III


This little explanation with Mr. Elinor could not find herself in the carriage with Mrs. Elton, from the particulars
detailed by her husband, thought it all extremely shabby, and very
inferior to her own.—“Very little white satin, very few lace veils; a
most pitiful business!—Selina would stare when she heard of it.”—But,
in spite of these deficiencies, the wishes, the hopes, the confidence,
the predictions of the small band of true friends who witnessed the
ceremony, were fully answered in the perfect happiness of the union. I am sure they were talking of me; and I
could not help thinking that he was persuading her to speak to me—(do
you think he was, Miss Woodhouse?)—for presently she came forward—came
quite up to me, and asked me how I did, and seemed ready to shake
hands, if I would. “I did not know,” said she, “that you were even acquainted till the
other day.”

“Our acquaintance, however, is of many years date. Charlotte, the wife of Mr. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I am growing
every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. But I am
sorry to relate what ensued. Mr. You shall have a charming
wife.”

“She must be very lively, and have hazle eyes. She wanted to hear of him, when there
seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. Dashwood. “In a few months, my dear Marianne,” said she, “Elinor will, in all
probability be settled for life. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many
varying circumstances. yes—she will have her own room, of course; the room she always
has;—and there is the nursery for the children,—just as usual, you
know. At one time
Patty came to say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping. They were going to remove immediately to
Richmond. “Well, my dear,” he deliberately began, “considering we never saw her
before, she seems a very pretty sort of young lady; and I dare say she
was very much pleased with you. Here, leading the way
through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an
interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out
with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely
opened his lips. “Oh! Miss Lucy Steele is, I dare say, a very deserving young woman,
but in the present case you know, the connection must be impossible. Jennings,
but there were two others, a gentleman and lady, who were quite unknown
to her. Weston had
been speaking to her at the same moment. I ask only a comfortable home; and, considering Mr. We will go round the park every day. John Knightley more, to fit them for the
place.—Emma only might be as nature prompted, and shew herself just as
happy as she was. Elton,
but as the clergyman whose blessing at the altar might next fall on
herself.—Robert Martin and Harriet Smith, the latest couple engaged of
the three, were the first to be married. to be only just _tolerable_.”

“I beg you will not put it into Lizzy’s head to be vexed by his
ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite
a misfortune to be liked by him. There can be no doubt of your being a
gentleman’s daughter, and you must support your claim to that station
by every thing within your own power, or there will be plenty of people
who would take pleasure in degrading you.”

“Yes, to be sure, I suppose there are. Weston;—Mrs. She was vexed. Marianne’s feelings did not stop here. Widely
different was the effect of a second perusal. A valuable legacy
indeed! If there were but such
another man for you!”

“If you were to give me forty such men I never could be so happy as you. From such a connection she could not wonder that he should shrink. All that is
     required of you is, to assure to your daughter, by settlement, her
     equal share of the five thousand pounds, secured among your
     children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and,
     moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her, during your
     life, one hundred pounds per annum. You had it from himself, had you?”

“No, sir,” replied his son, laughing, “I seem to have had it from
nobody.—Very odd!—I really was persuaded of Mrs. There can be no doubt of
its being written for you and to you.”

Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion. But I can’t bear to see them dirty and nasty. She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr. “If he would only have done as well by himself,” said John Dashwood,
“as all his friends were disposed to do by him, he might now have been
in his proper situation, and would have wanted for nothing. She is grown so brown and coarse! Bingley is
come. you are an odd creature!” she cried, satisfied to have no one
preferred to herself.—“You are a humourist, and may say what you like. Respect for right conduct is felt by every body. I can remember no symptom of affection on either
side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware
that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. As they drove to Mr. I would not trust you so near it as Eastbourne,
for fifty pounds! Margaret and I shall be as much benefited by it as yourselves. The weather affected Mr. Woodhouse received the thanks for
coming, which he asked for, when a glimpse was caught through the
blind, of two figures passing near the window. Jennings
considered that Marianne might probably be to _her_ what Charlotte was
to herself, her sympathy in _her_ sufferings was very sincere. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of
the highest kind. I have a note of his.—Do not you
remember, Mrs. She had great pleasure in hearing
Frank Churchill talked of; and, for his sake, greater pleasure than
ever in seeing Mr. Weston
would be at ease. Jennings’s. Was not she like a daughter, his eldest
daughter?—he must tell her; and Miss Bates being present, it passed, of
course, to Mrs. Ferrars herself, by her shuffling excuses,
seemed the only person surprised at her not giving more. say beautiful rather. Weston’s parting question. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as
acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. He is
as well acquainted with his own claims, as you can be with Harriet’s. After an affectionate
parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by
Mr. But he did not ask for hope or
encouragement. He knows the value of a good income as well as any
body. The
venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said, they never saw so fat
a haunch. Knightley; “but I
should say she was a good-tempered, soft-hearted girl, not likely to be
very, very determined against any young man who told her he loved her.”

Emma could not help laughing as she answered, “Upon my word, I believe
you know her quite as well as I do.—But, Mr. Bennet exceedingly. Churchill has
pride; but his pride is nothing to his wife’s: his is a quiet,
indolent, gentlemanlike sort of pride that would harm nobody, and only
make himself a little helpless and tiresome; but her pride is arrogance
and insolence! Weston’s dining-room does not accommodate more than ten
comfortably; and for my part, I would rather, under such circumstances,
fall short by two than exceed by two. “I see how it is,” said she. [Illustration:

     “_Whenever she spoke in a low voice_”
]

Mrs. I am sick of them all. Mr. Such another scheme, composed of so many
ill-assorted people, she hoped never to be betrayed into again. With mixed feelings, she seated herself at a little distance from the
numbers round the instrument, to listen. What praise is more valuable than the praise
of an intelligent servant? You are not going to be
_missish_, I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness, and she immediately
left the room. Will
not the old prejudice be too strong?”

And she talked in this way so long and successfully that, when forced
to give her attention again to her father and sister, she had nothing
worse to hear than Isabella’s kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax; and Jane
Fairfax, though no great favourite with her in general, she was at that
moment very happy to assist in praising. Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. The hill, crowned with wood, from
which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the
distance, was a beautiful object. Bennet himself, while his wife seriously commended Mr. no; Perry shall have all the credit.”

“I have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you, Miss Woodhouse,” she
shortly afterwards began, “since the party to Box Hill. Jennings,
and to _her_ she appeared nothing more than a little proud-looking
woman of uncordial address, who met her husband’s sisters without any
affection, and almost without having anything to say to them; for of
the quarter of an hour bestowed on Berkeley Street, she sat at least
seven minutes and a half in silence. He came to tell Mr. Do you think it will
look well?”

The whole party were but just reassembled in the drawing-room when Mr. Miss Churchill, however, being of age, and with the full command of her
fortune—though her fortune bore no proportion to the family-estate—was
not to be dissuaded from the marriage, and it took place, to the
infinite mortification of Mr. She could not be deceived in that. On both sides it was only assertion. John Dashwood would not much approve of Edward’s going into
orders.”

“Then I rather suspect that my interest would do very little.”

They were again silent for many minutes. But perhaps he may never have heard of there being
such a creature in the world.”

This was too loud a call for a compliment to be passed by, and Mr. The
wisest and best of men,--nay, the wisest and best of their actions,--may
be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a
joke.”

“Certainly,” replied Elizabeth, “there are such people, but I hope I am
not one of _them_. “Sure he
will not leave London before he has found them. Darcy.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make
inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Edward brought us a most charming account of the place: the
most complete thing of its kind, he said, that ever was, and you all
seemed to enjoy it beyond any thing. And when one considers the variety of hands, and of bad
hands too, that are to be deciphered, it increases the wonder.”

“The clerks grow expert from habit.—They must begin with some quickness
of sight and hand, and exercise improves them. Though much might be fancy, he could not doubt, when he
looked back, that she was in a weaker state of health than she had been
half a year ago. That is the
place to get husbands. Tell him I must see him again—must speak to him
instantly.—I cannot rest—I shall not have a moment’s peace till this is
explained—some dreadful misapprehension or other. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter
and fainter; and in further justification of Mr. Her legal allowance was not adequate to her fortune, nor
sufficient for her comfortable maintenance, and I learnt from my
brother that the power of receiving it had been made over some months
before to another person. Emma is spoiled by being the cleverest
of her family. And (raising his voice still more) I do not see why Miss Fairfax should
not be mentioned too. Mrs. She made her plan; she would speak of something totally
different—the children in Brunswick Square; and she only waited for
breath to begin, when Mr. Frank Churchill; we shall think and speak
of nobody else.”

“You will excuse my being so much over-powered. “Haye Park might do,” said she, “if the Gouldings would quit it, or the
great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is
too far off. That is a great thing. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so
long in one attitude.”

Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Elinor’s delight, as she saw what each felt in the meeting, was only
checked by an apprehension of its robbing Marianne of farther sleep:
but Mrs. Darcy’s progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and she was
perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. Mrs. His setting
off in such a hurry seems very like it. Marianne remained perfectly silent, though her countenance betrayed her
interest in what was said. If you wish me to talk to Mrs. Mr. I
cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who
should omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody
connected with the family.” And with a bow to Mr. Ford? he can see
ready wit in Harriet, but will not dine alone for her.”

Soon afterwards Mr. That such a
consequence as _this_ should ensue, you may easily believe was far
enough from my thoughts.”

“When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, I
suppose, to believe them fond of each other?”

“Not the slightest. Such was Miss Lucas’s scheme; and appearances were so
favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost
sure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very soon. Mrs. “This is too bad,” cried Emma, as they turned away. Jennings
commended her in her heart for being so honest. Ferrars
too—in short it has been a scene of such complicated distress—but I
will hope that the storm may be weathered without our being any of us
quite overcome. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people,
where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go. Mrs. Mrs. We
were within a few hours of eloping together for Scotland. Frank
Churchill turned towards her to listen. My Emma, does not every thing serve to prove more
and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with
each other?”

Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet’s
account, which she could not give any sincere explanation of. And Mrs. This was all sent with the instrument. Her visit to Abbey-Mill, this
summer, seems to have done his business. Elton was speaking with
animation, Harriet listening with a very pleased attention; and Emma,
having sent the child on, was beginning to think how she might draw
back a little more, when they both looked around, and she was obliged
to join them. Ten thousand a year! “There are inconveniences
attending such feelings as Marianne’s, which all the charms of
enthusiasm and ignorance of the world cannot atone for. Yes, I found myself, by
insensible degrees, sincerely fond of her; and the happiest hours of my
life were what I spent with her when I felt my intentions were strictly
honourable, and my feelings blameless. Indeed, I think I may say that you cannot,
for your behaviour to him is perfectly cordial, and if _that_ were your
opinion, I am sure you could never be civil to him.”

Marianne hardly knew what to say. I
should not have used the expression. Bennet spent the
morning together, as had been agreed on. It is a rectory, but a
small one; the late incumbent, I believe, did not make more than 200£
per annum, and though it is certainly capable of improvement, I fear,
not to such an amount as to afford him a very comfortable income. and Mrs. I assure
you, Jane Fairfax is a very delightful character, and interests me more
than I can express.”

“You appear to feel a great deal—but I am not aware how you or any of
Miss Fairfax’s acquaintance here, any of those who have known her
longer than yourself, can shew her any other attention than”—

“My dear Miss Woodhouse, a vast deal may be done by those who dare to
act. Twice did I leave them purposely together
in the course of the last morning, and each time did he most
unaccountably follow me out of the room. Knightley warmly, “Miss Fairfax
is as capable as any of us of forming a just opinion of Mrs. Bennet wished
to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of
her younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him. “Oh! Kitty was the
only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Another accidental meeting with the Martins was possible, and in
her present state, would be dangerous. Elton certainly did not very well know what to say. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and
I wonder how he could presume to do it. Darcy said very little, and Mr. He had a very
fine flock, and, while she was with them, he had been bid more for his
wool than any body in the country. How
thankful am I, that we never let them know what has been said against
him; we must forget it ourselves. He keeps a man-servant, does he? My father depends
on it. It must be her ardent wish that Harriet might be disappointed; and she
hoped, that when able to see them together again, she might at least be
able to ascertain what the chances for it were.—She should see them
henceforward with the closest observance; and wretchedly as she had
hitherto misunderstood even those she was watching, she did not know
how to admit that she could be blinded here.—He was expected back every
day. “And that,” said Mrs. “You look pale. Gardiner, “there is no absolute proof
that they are not gone to Scotland.”

“Oh, but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such a
presumption! She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. And yet it was far, very
far, from impossible.—Was it a new circumstance for a man of first-rate
abilities to be captivated by very inferior powers? Miss
Woodhouse, I am quite concerned, I am sure you hit your foot. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia. In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be musical, she was
invited to play. [Illustration]

One morning, about a week after Bingley’s engagement with Jane had been
formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the
dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window by the
sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up the
lawn. My dear Lizzy, they must have
passed within ten miles of us. To Caroline’s
assertion of her brother’s being partial to Miss Darcy, she paid no
credit. It was all read,
however, steadily, attentively, and without the smallest remark; and,
excepting one momentary glance at her, instantly withdrawn, in the fear
of giving pain—no remembrance of Box Hill seemed to exist. Bingley’s first choice.”

“Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.”

“Oh, you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. Collins’s wife by this time, had not it
been for her own perverseness. Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit
down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Lady
Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to
Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way. MY DEAR MADAM,
    “I have just had the honour of receiving your letter, for which I
    beg to return my sincere acknowledgments. Ferrars told me.”

“And are they going farther westward?”

“Yes, ma’am—but not to bide long. They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human
nature; and had some new extracts to admire and some new observations of
threadbare morality to listen to. The contempt which she had, very early in their acquaintance, felt for
her daughter-in-law, was very much increased by the farther knowledge
of her character, which half a year’s residence in her family afforded;
and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal
affection on the side of the former, the two ladies might have found it
impossible to have lived together so long, had not a particular
circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility, according to
the opinions of Mrs. I was there—one of the party.”

“Were you really?—Well!—But you observed nothing of course, for it
seems to be a new idea to you.—If I had been there, I think I should
have made some discoveries.”

“I dare say you would; but I, simple I, saw nothing but the fact, that
Miss Fairfax was nearly dashed from the vessel and that Mr. Having been
frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty
well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. But I had no inclination for the
law, even in this less abstruse study of it, which my family approved. “But surely,” said she, “I may enter his county with impunity,
and rob it of a few petrified spars, without his perceiving me.”

The period of expectation was now doubled. “The ladies were all at home.” She had never rejoiced at the sound
before, nor ever before entered the passage, nor walked up the stairs,
with any wish of giving pleasure, but in conferring obligation, or of
deriving it, except in subsequent ridicule. She had a moment’s fear of Miss Bates
keeping away from her. These kind of things are very well
at Christmas, when one is sitting round the fire; but quite out of
place, in my opinion, when one is exploring about the country in
summer. A line from me would bring you a little host of
acquaintance; and my particular friend, Mrs. She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. But she is really quite the gentlewoman.”

“Mrs. Mrs. “Well,” said Emma, “there is no disputing about taste.—At least you
admire her except her complexion.”

He shook his head and laughed.—“I cannot separate Miss Fairfax and her
complexion.”

“Did you see her often at Weymouth? Pass Mr. “No,” replied Lucy, “not to Mr. Elton which nobody else paid her. It was a
look, however, very well bestowed, for it relieved her own feelings,
and gave no intelligence to him. I
shall, therefore, set off to-morrow.’—If he would say so to her at
once, in the tone of decision becoming a man, there would be no
opposition made to his going.”

“No,” said Emma, laughing; “but perhaps there might be some made to his
coming back again. Elton does not
talk _to_ Miss Fairfax as she speaks _of_ her. I have heard you mention them with consideration
these twenty years at least.”

“Ah, you do not know what I suffer.”

“But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four
thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.”

“It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not
visit them.”

“Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them
all.”

Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after
herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little
curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending
not to hear. Your sister wrote to me again, you
know, the very next morning. I am
glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be
discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone.”

“My uncle is to send a servant for us.”

“Oh! It is remarkable, that Emma, in the many, very many, points of view in
which she was now beginning to consider Donwell Abbey, was never struck
with any sense of injury to her nephew Henry, whose rights as
heir-expectant had formerly been so tenaciously regarded. Darcy, to be treating his father’s favourite in such a
manner,--one whom his father had promised to provide for. “You have given Miss Smith all that she required,” said he; “you have
made her graceful and easy. Elizabeth, for the sake of
saying something that might turn her mother’s thoughts, now asked her if
Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away. She was then interrupted by Harriet’s coming in; and if Harriet’s
praise could have satisfied her, she might soon have been comforted. She was
supported into the drawing-room between her daughter and her friend;
and there, shedding tears of joy, though still unable to speak,
embraced Elinor again and again, turning from her at intervals to press
Colonel Brandon’s hand, with a look which spoke at once her gratitude,
and her conviction of his sharing with herself in the bliss of the
moment. Gardiner. He only meant that there was not
such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town, which
you must acknowledge to be true.”

“Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with
many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few
neighbourhoods larger. But you, who have known Miss Fairfax from a child, must be a
better judge of her character, and of how she is likely to conduct
herself in critical situations, than I can be.”

“I have known her from a child, undoubtedly; we have been children and
women together; and it is natural to suppose that we should be
intimate,—that we should have taken to each other whenever she visited
her friends. There was a languor, a want of
spirits, a want of union, which could not be got over. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud,
ill-natured boy. Mrs. Palmer
would visit him, for he is in the opposition, you know, and besides it
is such a way off. She continued to look
back, but in vain; and soon, with what appeared unusual speed, they
were half way down the hill, and every thing left far behind. He looked more than usually grave, and though expressing
satisfaction at finding Miss Dashwood alone, as if he had somewhat in
particular to tell her, sat for some time without saying a word. Weston’s loss had been important. Elton, Mrs. It was much
easier to chat than to study; much pleasanter to let her imagination
range and work at Harriet’s fortune, than to be labouring to enlarge
her comprehension or exercise it on sober facts; and the only literary
pursuit which engaged Harriet at present, the only mental provision she
was making for the evening of life, was the collecting and transcribing
all the riddles of every sort that she could meet with, into a thin
quarto of hot-pressed paper, made up by her friend, and ornamented with
ciphers and trophies. Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. Churchill. Mr. Elton, in
very good spirits, was one of the first to walk in. Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid
whether Pemberley were not a very fine place, what was the name of its
proprietor, and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for
the summer? The move began; and Miss Bates might be heard
from that moment, without interruption, till her being seated at table
and taking up her spoon. Her pulse was much stronger, and every
symptom more favourable than on the preceding visit. As to an additional servant,
the expense would be a trifle; Mama she was sure would never object to
it; and any horse would do for _him;_ he might always get one at the
park; as to a stable, the merest shed would be sufficient. Knightley will be so
kind as to meet him.”

“With a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time,” said Mr. With the Gardiners they were always on the most intimate terms. Even this conquest would appear
valuable in her eyes. The possibility of Mr. That will
make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for
him.”

Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her
husband’s incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her
neighbours might all see Mr. There was no want
of likeness, she had been fortunate in the attitude, and as she meant
to throw in a little improvement to the figure, to give a little more
height, and considerably more elegance, she had great confidence of its
being in every way a pretty drawing at last, and of its filling its
destined place with credit to them both—a standing memorial of the
beauty of one, the skill of the other, and the friendship of both; with
as many other agreeable associations as Mr. I am by no means assured of
his regard for me. Frank Churchill’s not coming, except as a disappointment at
Randalls. Scarcely a syllable was
uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. What a pity it is that
Mr. He could not be
persuaded that so many good-looking houses as he saw around him, could
not furnish numbers enough for such a meeting; and even when
particulars were given and families described, he was still unwilling
to admit that the inconvenience of such a mixture would be any thing,
or that there would be the smallest difficulty in every body’s
returning into their proper place the next morning. “Mr. Poor
Jane! Mrs. “Why, their visit is
but just begun!”

Lucy was silenced. Weston. In the present case it
took up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were most like his
father or mother, and in what particular he resembled either, for of
course every body differed, and every body was astonished at the
opinion of the others. George and Mr. After
sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour, without hearing Miss
Bingley’s voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold
inquiry after the health of her family. Darcy,” observed Miss Bingley, in a half whisper,
“that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine
eyes.”

“Not at all,” he replied: “they were brightened by the exercise.” A
short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. “Oh! Hurst
thought the same, and added,--

“She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent
walker. Were
I even by any blessed chance at liberty again—”

Elinor stopped him with a reproof. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. The event, however, was most joyful; and every day was giving her fresh
reason for thinking so.—Harriet’s parentage became known. She is a good-hearted girl as ever lived. They were lucky enough to find Lady Middleton at home, and Sir John
came in before their visit ended. Mrs. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when
her husband was gone to enjoy himself in London or Bath; and with the
Bingleys they both of them frequently stayed so long, that even
Bingley’s good-humour was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to _talk_
of giving them a hint to be gone. I was almost sure you would not leave
London yet awhile; though you _told_ me, you know, at Barton, that you
should not stay above a _month_. Every time
they met, it was more decided and remarkable. Darcy’s treatment of him, she tried to remember something of
that gentleman’s reputed disposition, when quite a lad, which might
agree with it; and was confident, at last, that she recollected having
heard Mr. Mrs. You see on
what a footing we are. She got her to
Hartfield, and shewed her the most unvarying kindness, striving to
occupy and amuse her, and by books and conversation, to drive Mr. A discovery took place,”—here
he hesitated and looked down. I must find Mr. She had understood it was to be
delayed till Colonel Campbell’s return.”

“So very kind!” replied Miss Bates. There was neither in figure nor face any
likeness between the ladies. My friend has an excellent understanding--though
I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of
affection whatever on the occasion. And you are
never to stir out of doors, till you can prove that you have spent ten
minutes of every day in a rational manner.”

Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry. Dixon and Miss Campbell were the persons; and I thought it a
very strong proof.”

“Certainly—very strong it was; to own the truth, a great deal stronger
than, if _I_ had been Miss Campbell, would have been at all agreeable
to me. In no other light could you have been more to me than a common
acquaintance. I never was at his house; but
they say it is a sweet pretty place.”

“As vile a spot as I ever saw in my life,” said Mr. Mr. Knightley immediately got up, and in a manner
decidedly graver than usual, said,

“I would not go away without seeing you, but I have no time to spare,
and therefore must now be gone directly. Elton was the only one
whose assistance she asked. To know
that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish
Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own
vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation
to openness as nothing could have conquered, but the state of indecision
in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate,
and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into
repeating something of Bingley, which might only grieve her sister
further. Jennings sat on Elinor’s right hand; and they had not been long
seated, before she leant behind her and Willoughby, and said to
Marianne, loud enough for them both to hear, “I have found you out in
spite of all your tricks. I thank you again and again, for not going to
the Lakes. He knew her illnesses; they never occurred
but for her own convenience. There is an openness, a quickness,
almost a bluntness in Mr. He meant to
     resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation,
     he could conjecture very little about it. But with all the hopes
of cheerfulness, and all the present comfort of delay, there was still
such an evil hanging over her in the hour of explanation with Harriet,
as made it impossible for Emma to be ever perfectly at ease. Such
a change in a man of so much pride excited not only astonishment but
gratitude--for to love, ardent love, it must be attributed; and, as
such, its impression on her was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no
means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined. Knightley’s marrying did not in the least subside. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression. “My judgment,” he returned, “is all on your side of the question; but I
am afraid my practice is much more on your sister’s. the ladies had crowded round the table,
where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee,
in so close a confederacy, that there was not a single vacancy near her
which would admit of a chair. I would advise you merely to put on
whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest--there is no occasion
for anything more. He could not meet her in conversation, rational or playful. “Lizzy is
only headstrong in such matters as these. I
want a change. A gentleman’s family is all that I should condition for.”

“I know you, I know you; you would take up with any thing; but I shall
be a little more nice, and I am sure the good Campbells will be quite
on my side; with your superior talents, you have a right to move in the
first circle. It was too early in the morning for visitors; and besides, the
equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours. Every moment had brought a
fresh surprize; and every surprize must be matter of humiliation to
her.—How to understand it all! The interest with which she thus anticipated the party, was soon
afterwards increased, more powerfully than pleasantly, by her hearing
that the Miss Steeles were also to be at it. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked
too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I
left Hunsford,--between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. [Illustration:

     “to assure you in the most animated language”
]




CHAPTER XIX. “We
thought you were to bring them.”

The mistake had been slight. James’s, with very decent composure. Knightley’s eyes had preceded Miss
Bates’s in a glance at Jane. Nobody is more liked than
Mr. We shall live within a few
miles of each other, and shall meet every day of our lives. and yet, she could not help rather anticipating something
decisive. Palmer, with a laugh, “I shall be quite
disappointed if you do not. Your views for Harriet are best known
to yourself; but as you make no secret of your love of match-making, it
is fair to suppose that views, and plans, and projects you have;—and as
a friend I shall just hint to you that if Elton is the man, I think it
will be all labour in vain.”

Emma laughed and disclaimed. Though he had
detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry
in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and
pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those
of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. I should have
expected better judgment in Colonel Campbell.”

From that moment, Emma could have taken her oath that Mr. Harriet may pick and chuse. Palmer maintained the common, but unfatherly opinion among his sex,
of all infants being alike; and though she could plainly perceive, at
different times, the most striking resemblance between this baby and
every one of his relations on both sides, there was no convincing his
father of it; no persuading him to believe that it was not exactly like
every other baby of the same age; nor could he even be brought to
acknowledge the simple proposition of its being the finest child in the
world. Willoughby, on his side, gave every proof of his pleasure in their
acquaintance, which an evident wish of improving it could offer. It was
impossible to say how much he should be gratified by being employed on
such an errand.”

“He was too good!—she could not endure the thought!—she would not give
him such a troublesome office for the world,”—brought on the desired
repetition of entreaties and assurances,—and a very few minutes settled
the business. I shall soon have done. It is
wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that
way. “If this open weather holds much longer,” said Mrs. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,
whose eagerness for their cousin’s appearance would not allow them to
wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her
for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. I need not so totally despair of an equal
alliance, as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith!—No, madam, my
visits to Hartfield have been for yourself only; and the encouragement
I received—”

“Encouragement!—I give you encouragement!—Sir, you have been entirely
mistaken in supposing it. Be
observant of him. Cole, were left very busy over
parish business—that as long as he had staid, however, it had been
pleasant enough, as he had found them in general a set of
gentlemanlike, sensible men; and spoke so handsomely of Highbury
altogether—thought it so abundant in agreeable families—that Emma began
to feel she had been used to despise the place rather too much. Ferrars’s disposition
and designs. They would catch worse colds at the Crown than
anywhere.”

“I was going to observe, sir,” said Frank Churchill, “that one of the
great recommendations of this change would be the very little danger of
any body’s catching cold—so much less danger at the Crown than at
Randalls! “I do not blame Jane,” she continued, “for Jane would have got Mr. She could
think of nothing but of Mr. “Pray be quick, sir,”—said Elinor, impatiently;—“I have no time to
spare.”

He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation, and seemed not to
hear her. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. pray apologize for my having disliked him so much before. She was so eager to have them
drawn that I could not refuse; but there is no making children of three
or four years old stand still you know; nor can it be very easy to take
any likeness of them, beyond the air and complexion, unless they are
coarser featured than any of mama’s children ever were. “On the misery of what she had suffered, during the concealment of so
many months,” continued Mrs. Woodhouse, full of trivial communications and harmless
gossip. It was some consolation to
think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next,
and a still greater that in less than a fortnight she should herself be
with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her
spirits, by all that affection could do. Darcy has not made him just to you. Dashwood; “these objections are
nonsensical. Happy shall I be when his stay at Netherfield is over!”

“I wish I could say anything to comfort you,” replied Elizabeth; “but it
is wholly out of my power. It
was his idea to bring her to Hartfield: he had thought of no other
place. I do not pretend to be a wit. ‘But how
can it be done?’ said she; ‘my dear Ferrars, do tell me how it is to be
managed. Her astonishment at what she
heard was at first too great for words; but at length forcing herself
to speak, and to speak cautiously, she said, with calmness of manner,
which tolerably well concealed her surprise and solicitude—“May I ask
if your engagement is of long standing?”

“We have been engaged these four years.”

“Four years!”

“Yes.”

Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to believe it. Oh, no.”

“But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?”

“No--I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.”

“But you _will_ know it, when I have told you what happened the very
next day.”

She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far
as they concerned George Wickham. came crying to me the day
after, in a great fright for fear of Mrs. Knightley loudly and warmly; and
with calmer asperity, added, a few moments afterwards, “No, he is not
her equal indeed, for he is as much her superior in sense as in
situation. They were, in fact, very fine
ladies; not deficient in good-humour when they were pleased, nor in the
power of being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited. for I dare not hope,” he continued, in a lower and more
serious tone, “that he is improved in essentials.”

“Oh, no!” said Elizabeth. Jennings, with a
very intelligent “Ah! “Miss Woodhouse,” said Frank Churchill, after examining a table behind
him, which he could reach as he sat, “have your nephews taken away
their alphabets—their box of letters? */

“My dear Brother,

     “At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such
     as, upon the whole, I hope will give you satisfaction. Little things do not irritate him. She had heard nothing of Lady
Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or
miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money and rank she
thought she could witness without trepidation. “Your behaviour was certainly very wrong,” said she; “because—to say
nothing of my own conviction, our relations were all led away by it to
fancy and expect _what_, as you were _then_ situated, could never be.”

He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart, and a mistaken
confidence in the force of his engagement. The
happiness of this most happy day, received its completion, in the
animated contemplation of his worth which this comparison produced. CHAPTER XXIV. Elton was still talking, still engaged in some interesting detail;
and Emma experienced some disappointment when she found that he was
only giving his fair companion an account of the yesterday’s party at
his friend Cole’s, and that she was come in herself for the Stilton
cheese, the north Wiltshire, the butter, the celery, the beet-root, and
all the dessert. She
listened, and found it well worth listening to. She wished him to speak, but he would
not. When have you been prevented by want of money from going
wherever you chose or procuring anything you had a fancy for?”

“These are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I have
experienced many hardships of that nature. You know, Mrs. Jennings, when Marianne was taken from them, Margaret had reached an
age highly suitable for dancing, and not very ineligible for being
supposed to have a lover. my dear sir, her throat is so much better that I have hardly any
uneasiness about it. Far be it from me to repine at his doing so; he had an
undoubted right to dispose of his own property as he chose, but, in
consequence of it, we have been obliged to make large purchases of
linen, china, &c. If you and Miss
Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very
thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.”

“What you ask,” said Elizabeth, “is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr. A fine place, but very
retired.”

“Aye—like Maple Grove, I dare say. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
library. It is
impossible. He earnestly pressed
her, after giving the particulars of the house and garden, to come with
her daughters to Barton Park, the place of his own residence, from
whence she might judge, herself, whether Barton Cottage, for the houses
were in the same parish, could, by any alteration, be made comfortable
to her. Knightley, “whoever may have
had the charge of her, it does not appear to have been any part of
their plan to introduce her into what you would call good society. Elton? Goddard’s, that Mr. Dashwood and her daughters to begin their
journey. I feel for him sincerely.”

A few minutes more spent in the same kind of effusion, concluded his
visit; and with repeated assurances to his sisters that he really
believed there was no material danger in Fanny’s indisposition, and
that they need not therefore be very uneasy about it, he went away;
leaving the three ladies unanimous in their sentiments on the present
occasion, as far at least as it regarded Mrs. Knightley leading
Harriet to the set!—Never had she been more surprized, seldom more
delighted, than at that instant. I had therefore nothing in the world to
do, but to fancy myself in love; and as my mother did not make my home
in every respect comfortable, as I had no friend, no companion in my
brother, and disliked new acquaintance, it was not unnatural for me to
be very often at Longstaple, where I always felt myself at home, and
was always sure of a welcome; and accordingly I spent the greatest part
of my time there from eighteen to nineteen: Lucy appeared everything
that was amiable and obliging. Lady
Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which
becomes herself and daughter. I am not prejudiced.”

“But I am very much, and without being at all ashamed of it. About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready
for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in
confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running
upstairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. Contrary to the usual course of things, Mr. She felt that Edward stood
very high in her opinion. One
cannot resolve upon them in a hurry. Bates’s,
in the hope that Jane would be induced to join her—but it would not
do;—Miss Bates came to the carriage door, all gratitude, and agreeing
with her most earnestly in thinking an airing might be of the greatest
service—and every thing that message could do was tried—but all in
vain. Mr. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time,
with--

“It is _your_ turn to say something now, Mr. Nothing was to be done that he did not
     do himself; though I am sure (and I do not speak it to be thanked,
     therefore say nothing about it) your uncle would most readily have
     settled the whole. They all united; and, on
reaching Hartfield gates, Emma, who knew it was exactly the sort of
visiting that would be welcome to her father, pressed them all to go in
and drink tea with him. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the
silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Design could never bring them in each other’s way: negligence
could never leave them exposed to a surprise; and chance had less in
its favour in the crowd of London than even in the retirement of
Barton, where it might force him before her while paying that visit at
Allenham on his marriage, which Mrs. The
intelligence however, which _she_ would not give, soon flowed from
another quarter. Little had Mrs. Bennet
came from it. Woodhouse to be induced to
consent?—he, who had never yet alluded to their marriage but as a
distant event. The stupidest fellow! I do not mean to set you against him, but indeed he is not
quite the thing!”

Mrs. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight
Wickham, wherever he meets him, and then he will be killed, and what is
to become of us all? About the court, such
instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.”

Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their
visit to Rosings. But is not this a sudden scheme?”

“Yes—rather—I have been thinking of it some little time.”

Emma was sure he had not forgiven her; he looked unlike himself. When you told Mrs. Long before he reappeared, attending the short, neat, brisk-moving
aunt, and her elegant niece,—Mrs. Knightley’s coming and asking me to dance, when Mr. However, your coming just at this time is the
greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us of
long sleeves.”

Mrs. They can do nothing
satisfactorily without you.”

Emma was most happy to be called to such a council; and her father,
engaging to think it all over while she was gone, the two young people
set off together without delay for the Crown. “Brandon is just the kind of man,” said Willoughby one day, when they
were talking of him together, “whom every body speaks well of, and
nobody cares about; whom all are delighted to see, and nobody remembers
to talk to.”

“That is exactly what I think of him,” cried Marianne. Oh! Weston, I think there is
nothing he does not deserve. “And you _do_ think something better of me than you did?” said he,
letting it fall, and leaning against the mantel-piece as if forgetting
he was to go. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion
of her.”

“No more have I,” said Mr. “No, to be
sure you could not; but I never thought of that before. Weston. Collins, or any congratulations
to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the
Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. How I shall laugh! He was delighted with every thing; admired
Hartfield sufficiently for Mr. I think very well of Mr. It was before tea—stay—no, it could not be before tea, because
we were just going to cards—and yet it was before tea, because I
remember thinking—Oh! She, who had seen
her week after week so constantly suffering, oppressed by anguish of
heart which she had neither courage to speak of, nor fortitude to
conceal, now saw with a joy, which no other could equally share, an
apparent composure of mind, which, in being the result as she trusted
of serious reflection, must eventually lead her to contentment and
cheerfulness. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. Sir John’s
confidence in his own judgment rose with this animated praise, and he
set off directly for the cottage to tell the Miss Dashwoods of the Miss
Steeles’ arrival, and to assure them of their being the sweetest girls
in the world. If it failed to produce equal
exertion, it could not be an equal conviction.”

“Oh, the difference of situation and habit! how
he’ll chuckle over this news! “As soon as my aunt gets well, I shall go abroad,” said he. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what
has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had looked
forward with impatient desire, did not, in taking place, bring all the
satisfaction she had promised herself. As such, however, they were treated by her with quiet civility; and by
her husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody
beyond himself, his wife, and their child. Wickham, indeed, had gone to her on their first arrival in
     London; and had she been able to receive them into her house, they
     would have taken up their abode with her. In another moment a happier sight caught her;—Mr. But may we not
hope that the period of future happiness, to which Miss Bingley looks
forward, may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful
intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater
satisfaction as sisters? He then handed
her in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed,
when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies of Rosings. Mrs. They walked thither directly. When first Mr. The word was discovered, and with a faint smile
pushed away. Weston was sufficiently
recovered to admit Mr. Elizabeth
dared not lift up her eyes. She wanted,
rather, to be quiet, and out of temptation; but still, as it was
desirable that she should appear, in general, like her usual self, she
took care to express as much interest in the circumstance, and enter as
warmly into Mr. Come, Miss Marianne, let us
strike hands upon the bargain, and if Miss Dashwood will change her
mind by and bye, why so much the better.”

“I thank you, ma’am, sincerely thank you,” said Marianne, with warmth:
“your invitation has insured my gratitude for ever, and it would give
me such happiness, yes, almost the greatest happiness I am capable of,
to be able to accept it. What are you telling Miss Bennet? and Mrs. take care.”

“My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak as to be in danger now.”

“I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with
you as ever.”

They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. How can Emma imagine she has any
thing to learn herself, while Harriet is presenting such a delightful
inferiority? We accordingly
went--and there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my
friend the certain evils of such a choice. I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult
the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not
some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a
pleasure.”

“If you mean Darcy,” cried her brother, “he may go to bed, if he
chooses, before it begins; but as for the ball, it is quite a settled
thing, and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough I shall send
round my cards.”

“I should like balls infinitely better,” she replied, “if they were
carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably
tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It was a child’s play, chosen to conceal a deeper
game on Frank Churchill’s part. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making
signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,
impenetrably grave. Palmer sauntered towards the Miss Dashwoods to express his
surprise on seeing them in town, though Colonel Brandon had been first
informed of their arrival at his house, and he had himself said
something very droll on hearing that they were to come. John Knightley
must be in London again by the end of the first week in November. Elton, Harriet will not like to sit. But when you have had time to think it all over, I hope you will be
satisfied with what I have done. my dear; but so much as Patty has to do!—And it is a kindness to
employ our men.”

Jane looked as if she did not mean to be conquered; but instead of
answering, she began speaking again to Mr. It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession
of a good fortune must be in want of a wife. It is my daily errand. Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help
fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect,
and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her, as if
wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. She had previously determined how far she would proceed,
on any application of the sort; and it would be safer for both, to have
the judicious law of her own brain laid down with speed.—She was
decided, and thus spoke—

“Harriet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly
for denial; and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded, as
having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first
disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind
than on hers. Elton’s side, there was no avoiding a
knowledge of their principal subjects: The post-office—catching
cold—fetching letters—and friendship, were long under discussion; and
to them succeeded one, which must be at least equally unpleasant to
Jane—inquiries whether she had yet heard of any situation likely to
suit her, and professions of Mrs. It was a palpable display, repeated on every
possible occasion. Ring the bell,
Kitty, for Hill. Mr. The arrival of a new family in the country was always a matter of joy
to him, and in every point of view he was charmed with the inhabitants
he had now procured for his cottage at Barton. The cold repast was over, and the party were to go out once more to see
what had not yet been seen, the old Abbey fish-ponds; perhaps get as
far as the clover, which was to be begun cutting on the morrow, or, at
any rate, have the pleasure of being hot, and growing cool again.—Mr. He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very
great! Dashwood, who felt
obliged to hope that he had left Mrs. She inquired after his sister, but could do no more. Every thing turns out for his good.—He meets with a young
woman at a watering-place, gains her affection, cannot even weary her
by negligent treatment—and had he and all his family sought round the
world for a perfect wife for him, they could not have found her
superior.—His aunt is in the way.—His aunt dies.—He has only to
speak.—His friends are eager to promote his happiness.—He had used
every body ill—and they are all delighted to forgive him.—He is a
fortunate man indeed!”

“You speak as if you envied him.”

“And I do envy him, Emma. It was to be such a secret!”

“If it was to be a secret,” said Jane, “say not another word on the
subject. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so
little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the
unhappiness which her sister’s refusal must have given him. This would not, in itself, have been sufficient for the delicacy
of Miss Dashwood;—but it was inforced with so much real politeness by
Mr. Weston, I suppose,” interrupted Mrs. Elton.”

“And when,” thought Emma, “will there be a beginning of Mr. An effort even yet lighter might have made her their
friend. Tease calmness of temper and presence of mind! Jennings
should want company, I am sure we should be very glad to come and stay
with her for as long a time as she likes. If their evenings at
the park were concluded with cards, he cheated himself and all the rest
of the party to get her a good hand. From a night of more sleep than she had expected, Marianne awoke the
next morning to the same consciousness of misery in which she had
closed her eyes. Bennet could certainly
spare you for another fortnight.”

“But my father cannot. They were married,
married in town, and now hastening down to her uncle’s. I hardly know how it has happened; a
little, perhaps, from that wickedness on my side which was prone to
take disgust towards a girl so idolized and so cried up as she always
was, by her aunt and grandmother, and all their set. Mrs. Knightley, I wish you had the
benefit of this; I think this would convince you. Ferrars’s views for you at present, Edward?” said she,
when dinner was over and they had drawn round the fire; “are you still
to be a great orator in spite of yourself?”

“No. Well, Colonel, I have brought two
young ladies with me, you see—that is, you see but one of them now, but
there is another somewhere. I do not
want the match—I do not want to injure dear little Henry—but the idea
has been given me by circumstances; and if Mr. Jane recollected herself soon; and putting the letter away, tried to
join, with her usual cheerfulness, in the general conversation: but
Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her attention
even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave,
than a glance from Jane invited her to follow her upstairs. I told you that your suspicions would guide mine.”

“If so, you must extend your suspicions and comprehend _Mr_. On _her_
measures depended those of her two friends; Mrs. One may be continually
abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot be always laughing
at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.”

“Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat
the matter as you do now.”

“Indeed, I could not. One question after this only remained undecided, between them, one
difficulty only was to be overcome. “What a precious deposit!” said he with a tender sigh, as he received
it. A little curiosity Emma had; and she made the most of it while her
friend related. Jennings’ manners, and invariably disgusted by them, should overlook
every inconvenience of that kind, should disregard whatever must be
most wounding to her irritable feelings, in her pursuit of one object,
was such a proof, so strong, so full, of the importance of that object
to her, as Elinor, in spite of all that had passed, was not prepared to
witness. Why did not you seek legal redress?”

“There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to
give me no hope from law. Collins’s addresses, by engaging them towards
herself. Oh, brother, how
kind you are! She recognised the whole of Lucy in the message, and
was very confident that Edward would never come near them. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all
the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name as
they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. All that remained to be done was to be speedy;
and, therefore staying only till she could leave Mrs. Plain dealing was
always best. Woodhouse from any draught of
air, and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the honour
of his company.” Upon the whole, she was very persuadable; and it being
briefly settled among themselves how it might be done without
neglecting his comfort—how certainly Mrs. The Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day, and the two families at
Barton were again left to entertain each other. Five daughters brought up at home
without a governess! Is it not so, Mrs. Every body was punctual, every body in their best looks:
not a tear, and hardly a long face to be seen. Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. Here ceased the concert part of the evening, for Miss
Woodhouse and Miss Fairfax were the only young lady performers; but
soon (within five minutes) the proposal of dancing—originating nobody
exactly knew where—was so effectually promoted by Mr. She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of
their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance. Mrs. He found he could not be useful, and his feelings were too much
irritated for talking. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantel-piece with his eyes fixed
on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than
surprise. I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, it is very
delightful to me, to be reminded of a place I am so extremely partial
to as Maple Grove. Good soul! Emma watched and decided, that with such feelings as were now shewn, it
could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily
absenting himself; that he had not been acting a part, or making a
parade of insincere professions; and that Mr. Knightley was to dine with them—rather against the inclination of
Mr. I know we
shall be happy. They were in ----
     Street. “At Delaford, she will be within an easy distance of me,” added Mrs. “Mrs. I shall be back by dinner.”

“I admire the activity of your benevolence,” observed Mary, “but every
impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,
exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.”

“We will go as far as Meryton with you,” said Catherine and Lydia. Knightley.—“Robert Martin’s manners have sense, sincerity, and
good-humour to recommend them; and his mind has more true gentility
than Harriet Smith could understand.”

Emma made no answer, and tried to look cheerfully unconcerned, but was
really feeling uncomfortable and wanting him very much to be gone. The very circumstance, in its unpleasantest
form, which they would each have been most anxious to avoid, had fallen
on them.—They were not only all three together, but were together
without the relief of any other person. There was
another reason, too, for her opposition. She
could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her
question and read on. Perry; I
happened to meet him in the street. “I am afraid I am sometimes very fanciful and troublesome.”

“My dearest papa! CHAPTER XI


It may be possible to do without dancing entirely. It was
his duty. Miss Darcy’s praise occupied
the chief of it. The alteration is not in them, if their parties are
grown tedious and dull. Weston went on. Mr. To interrupt
a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed,
she soon afterwards said,--

“I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of
having somebody at his disposal. I would not bind myself to allow them any
thing yearly. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer; and,
therefore, abruptly changing the conversation, talked on indifferent
matters till they reached the Parsonage. Darcy, she was directly retreating. She
had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural
beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. Mrs. Edward assured them himself of his being in town, within a very short
time, by twice calling in Berkeley Street. I don’t say that
it is not a disagreeable business—but things might be much worse.—If we
walk fast, we shall soon be at Randalls.”

Emma found that she must wait; and now it required little effort. Elton himself, evidently coming towards it, and as they walked on
slowly together in conversation about the invalid—of whom he, on the
rumour of considerable illness, had been going to inquire, that he
might carry some report of her to Hartfield—they were overtaken by Mr. They are but too apt to give up music.”

“But you, who are so extremely fond of it—there can be no danger,
surely?”

“I should hope not; but really when I look around among my
acquaintance, I tremble. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself
mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent
to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was
unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.”

Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his
friend. Alas! Knightley till after supper;
but, when they were all in the ballroom again, her eyes invited him
irresistibly to come to her and be thanked. This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and
she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the
acquaintance of some of those very people, against whom his pride had
revolted, in his offer to herself. Surprised and alarmed they proceeded directly into the room she had
just quitted, where they found only Willoughby, who was leaning against
the mantel-piece with his back towards them. So Emma thought, at
least. Weston, he
had not the smallest doubt of being highly interesting to every body in
the room. Those who are standing by
are usually thinking of something very different.”

This Emma felt was aimed at her; and it made her quite angry. “And
_that_,” he presently added, “might perhaps be in _his_ head when the
acquaintance between them first began. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her
sister must bring them more frequently together. “Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp,
and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful
little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss
Grantley’s.”

“Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? She liked his open manners, but a
little less of open-heartedness would have made him a higher
character.—General benevolence, but not general friendship, made a man
what he ought to be.—She could fancy such a man. I hope time has not made you less
willing to pardon. I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband
before you came back. This she had been prepared for when she entered the house; but meant,
having once talked him handsomely over, to be no farther incommoded by
any troublesome topic, and to wander at large amongst all the
Mistresses and Misses of Highbury, and their card-parties. “Two offences of a very different nature, and by no means of equal
magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. Woodhouse
talked over his alarms, and Emma was in spirits to persuade them away
with all her usual promptitude. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his
first object. We have certainly done our best; and most
fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior
society, and from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of
varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that
your Hunsford visit cannot have been entirely irksome. But I
will not repine. Always the first
person to be thought of! The time may come when Harry will regret that so
large a sum was parted with. Ford.”

“Aye, that will be much best,” said Harriet, quite satisfied, “I should
not at all like to have it sent to Mrs. He had
followed her into the shrubbery with no idea of trying it. How could
such a thought occur to you? You
mentioned _two_ instances. Mr. Her
complexion was sallow; and her features small, without beauty, and
naturally without expression; but a lucky contraction of the brow had
rescued her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity, by giving it
the strong characters of pride and ill nature. John Dashwood,
without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law,
arrived with her child and their attendants. She was
afterwards looking for her shawl—Frank Churchill was looking also—it
was growing dusk, and the room was in confusion; and how they parted,
Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin
Elizabeth and Mrs. Bennet’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such
as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for
it gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had
been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and
more foolish than his daughter! Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious. Of course I have not transcribed beyond the first
eight lines.”

Mr. He was so miserable when he left us
at Longstaple, to go to you, that I was afraid you would think him
quite ill.”

“Did he come from your uncle’s, then, when he visited us?”

“Oh, yes; he had been staying a fortnight with us. Captain Weston, who had been considered, especially by the Churchills,
as making such an amazing match, was proved to have much the worst of
the bargain; for when his wife died, after a three years’ marriage, he
was rather a poorer man than at first, and with a child to maintain. Oh no! The gentlemen did approach: and when Mr. An injunction of secresy had
been among Mr. Elton. Dashwood smiled, and said nothing. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her
brother and his wife, who came, as usual, to spend the Christmas at
Longbourn. I wanted them to put off the wedding.”

“By the bye—I have not wished you joy. Woodhouse was fond of society in his own way. But not long was the interval of
tranquillity; for when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she
had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty,
preparing to oblige the company. Cole seemed to be relating
something of her that was expected to be very interesting. Was his engagement to Lucy an
engagement of the heart? Very true. It has been, and is, and probably will always be a
heavy misfortune to me, that I have had no necessary business to engage
me, no profession to give me employment, or afford me any thing like
independence. Elton thought at all differently
from his wife. Emma knew it
to have been very much the case. and
Mrs. To give such intelligence to a person who could not
be interested in it, even if it were true, is not what I should expect
Colonel Brandon to do.”

“But I do assure you it was so, for all that, and I will tell you how
it happened. But Mrs. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I
am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the
situation.”

“Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,” said Mr. We must look to her one fault, and
remember that she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the
engagement, to bear that she should have been in such a state of
punishment.”

Emma knew that he was now getting to the Box Hill party, and grew
uncomfortable. They
followed her into the dining-parlour. Darcy
was expected there in the course of a few weeks; and though there were
not many of her acquaintance whom she did not prefer, his coming would
furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and
she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley’s designs on him
were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined
by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest
satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and
seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by
Miss Lucas and herself. But his pride, his abominable pride, his shameless avowal
of what he had done with respect to Jane, his unpardonable assurance in
acknowledging, though he could not justify it, and the unfeeling manner
which he had mentioned Mr. He is half way to Windsor by this time.”

“Has your son been with you, then?”

“Oh! Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself,” said she. Were you, yourself, ever to
marry, she is the very woman for you. But so it ought to be; they are people of large fortune, they are
related to you, and every civility and accommodation that can serve to
make your situation pleasant might be reasonably expected. Elton! I
would not say so to every body, Mrs. But now several minutes elapsed, without
bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist
the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often
found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but
the ground. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself
on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most
imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other
particulars; and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing him
the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from
knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.”

“Did Mr. It was reasonable, however, to
hope that they would not continue long. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters,
and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss
Darcy and the amusements of London, might be too much, she feared, for
the strength of his attachment. Collins returned,
the gentlemen accompanied him. Unwelcome as it was, Mr. He is the kind
of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything, which he
condescended to ask. Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. How could you be so insolent in your
wit to a woman of her character, age, and situation?—Emma, I had not
thought it possible.”

Emma recollected, blushed, was sorry, but tried to laugh it off. He had never heard of such books before I
mentioned them, but he is determined to get them now as soon as ever he
can.”

The next question was—

“What sort of looking man is Mr. And Jane will have such another. We never
could agree in our choice of a profession. Darcy. His letters disgust me.”

“Your feelings are singular. In a hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her
health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better. I am sincerely grieved for him and Mrs. Within doors there
was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot be
always within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the
two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither
almost every day. Collins made his
declaration in form. She knew that what Marianne and her mother
conjectured one moment, they believed the next—that with them, to wish
was to hope, and to hope was to expect. Knightley’s.—Alas! He could only obtain a promise of their
calling at the Park within a day or two, and then left them in
amazement at their indifference, to walk home and boast anew of their
attractions to the Miss Steeles, as he had been already boasting of the
Miss Steeles to them. Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this conversation, to
lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points; she was left, on the
contrary, with a melancholy impression of Colonel Brandon’s
unhappiness, and was prevented even from wishing it removed, by her
anxiety for the very event that must confirm it. Let me be able
to fancy that a better knowledge of my heart, and of my present
feelings, will draw from her a more spontaneous, more natural, more
gentle, less dignified, forgiveness. I need not tell you what is
to be done. she can have no
idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. “Might not
they use both rooms, and dance across the passage?” It seemed the best
scheme; and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a
better. We were last night at Lady Middleton’s, where
there was a dance. They burst on him, I
do not know how, but by some letter or message—and it was the discovery
of what she was doing, of this very project of hers, which determined
him to come forward at once, own it all to his uncle, throw himself on
his kindness, and, in short, put an end to the miserable state of
concealment that had been carrying on so long.”

Emma began to listen better. Taylor did say this morning, that one day
Miss Walker hinted to her, that she believed Mr. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new
acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. “Let me first see how he behaves,” said she; “it will then be early
enough for expectation.”

She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to
lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of her
sister as the servant was approaching the door. Ferrars were
both strongly prepossessed, that neither she nor her daughters were
such kind of women as Fanny would like to associate with. Indeed, Miss Woodhouse, (speaking more
collectedly,) with the consciousness which I have of misconduct, very
great misconduct, it is particularly consoling to me to know that those
of my friends, whose good opinion is most worth preserving, are not
disgusted to such a degree as to—I have not time for half that I could
wish to say. Jennings repeated her assurance that Mrs. I heard him say
all this as plain as could possibly be. we shall sit and gape at one another as dull as two
cats.”

Perhaps Mrs. She and the children might stay very well.”

“Ah! though I
thought it would be very good fun if I was.”

Her father lifted up his eyes, Jane was distressed, Elizabeth looked
expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of
which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued,--

“Oh, mamma, do the people hereabouts know I am married to-day? Weston.”

“I think, indeed,” said John Knightley pleasantly, “that Mr. I had not been long in
Hertfordshire before I saw, in common with others, that Bingley
preferred your elder sister to any other young woman in the country. His sisters were fine women,
with an air of decided fashion. I know your
disposition, Lizzy. “I do not find myself making any use of the word _sacrifice_,” said
she.—“In not one of all my clever replies, my delicate negatives, is
there any allusion to making a sacrifice. And a delightful dance it was to
be. Before the middle of the next day, he was at Hartfield; and he entered
the room with such an agreeable smile as certified the continuance of
the scheme. To look at her, nobody would think how delighted and happy
she is to have secured such a situation. Palmer, though treating their apprehensions as
idle, found the anxiety and importunity of his wife too great to be
withstood. Mrs. How odious I should think them!”

“It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of to yours.”

“Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.”

“I have already told her so once, by your desire.”

“I am afraid you do not like your pen. Your own judgment must direct
you.”

“To be sure,” continued Lucy, after a few minutes silence on both
sides, “his mother must provide for him sometime or other; but poor
Edward is so cast down by it! “I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?” said he,
as he joined her. How soon any other wishes
introduced themselves, I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half
an hour after I had seen you.”

He then told her of Georgiana’s delight in her acquaintance, and of her
disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to
the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of
following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed
before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there
had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must
comprehend. Weston, look sorrowful,
and have done. It made her animated—open hearted—she voluntarily said;—

“Oh! Between _them_ no subject is finished, no communication is
even made, till it has been made at least twenty times over. They can
only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me no other woman can
secure it.”

“Your first position is false. Even pleasure, you know, is
fatiguing—and I cannot say that any of them seemed very much to have
enjoyed it. Bates, Mrs. In this manner they had continued about a quarter of an hour, when
Marianne, whose nerves could not then bear any sudden noise, was
startled by a rap at the door. She
means it, I know.”

“Emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelve years
old. The
person is not tall enough for him, and has not his air.”

“He has, he has,” cried Marianne, “I am sure he has. Things must come to a crisis soon
now.”

She was obliged to break off from these very pleasant observations,
which were otherwise of a sort to run into great length, by the
eagerness of Harriet’s wondering questions. To
the Middletons, to the Palmers, the Steeles, to every common
acquaintance even, I had been insolent and unjust; with a heart
hardened against their merits, and a temper irritated by their very
attention. You knew nothing of me, or my family,
and, therefore, there could be no _occasion_ for ever mentioning my
name to you; and, as he was always particularly afraid of his sister’s
suspecting any thing, _that_ was reason enough for his not mentioning
it.”

She was silent.—Elinor’s security sunk; but her self-command did not
sink with it. The good lady had not given me the possibility of escape before.”

“And how did you think Miss Fairfax looking?”

“Ill, very ill—that is, if a young lady can ever be allowed to look
ill. Gardiner readily
promised every assistance in his power. But
though this behaviour assured Elinor that the conviction of this guilt
_was_ carried home to her mind, though she saw with satisfaction the
effect of it, in her no longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when he called,
in her speaking to him, even voluntarily speaking, with a kind of
compassionate respect, and though she saw her spirits less violently
irritated than before, she did not see her less wretched. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits: she had seen enough of
Bingley’s behaviour to Jane to be convinced that she would get him at
last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy
humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at
not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in
her way. Wax-candles in the schoolroom! It was settled that they should go to Box Hill. Dashwood introduced him to her as Mr. “I have sent for
you on an affair of importance. “Yours, very sincerely,

“M. From
what he said of Miss Darcy, I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud,
reserved, disagreeable girl. Elinor, starting back with a look of horror at the sight of him, obeyed
the first impulse of her heart in turning instantly to quit the room,
and her hand was already on the lock, when its action was suspended by
his hastily advancing, and saying, in a voice rather of command than
supplication,

“Miss Dashwood, for half an hour—for ten minutes—I entreat you to
stay.”

“No, sir,” she replied with firmness, “I shall _not_ stay. Mr. It is an engagement
in some respects not prosperously begun, for their marriage must be at
a very uncertain distance; and even secrecy, as far as it can be
observed, may now be very advisable.”

They were interrupted by the entrance of Margaret; and Elinor was then
at liberty to think over the representations of her mother, to
acknowledge the probability of many, and hope for the justice of all. When he was again in their company, he could not
help remembering what he had seen; nor could he avoid observations
which, unless it were like Cowper and his fire at twilight,

“Myself creating what I saw,”


brought him yet stronger suspicion of there being a something of
private liking, of private understanding even, between Frank Churchill
and Jane. Elton was first seen at church: but though devotion might be
interrupted, curiosity could not be satisfied by a bride in a pew, and
it must be left for the visits in form which were then to be paid, to
settle whether she were very pretty indeed, or only rather pretty, or
not pretty at all. I protest against having paid the smallest attention to any one
else. The connection was
certainly a respectable one, and probably gained her consideration
among her friends; and, if nothing more advantageous occurred, it would
be better for her to marry _you_ than be single.”

Edward was, of course, immediately convinced that nothing could have
been more natural than Lucy’s conduct, nor more self-evident than the
motive of it. I must love him; and now that I am
satisfied on one point, the one material point, I am sincerely anxious
for its all turning out well, and ready to hope that it may. He
_had_ despaired at one period; he had received such an injunction to
caution and silence, as for the time crushed every hope;—she had begun
by refusing to hear him.—The change had perhaps been somewhat
sudden;—her proposal of taking another turn, her renewing the
conversation which she had just put an end to, might be a little
extraordinary!—She felt its inconsistency; but Mr. Catherine and Lydia had information
for them of a different sort. John Dashwood had then leisure to consider how much there might
prudently be in his power to do for them. But these objections had all, with that happy
ardour of youth which Marianne and her mother equally shared, been
overcome or overlooked; and Elinor, in spite of every occasional doubt
of Willoughby’s constancy, could not witness the rapture of delightful
expectation which filled the whole soul and beamed in the eyes of
Marianne, without feeling how blank was her own prospect, how cheerless
her own state of mind in the comparison, and how gladly she would
engage in the solicitude of Marianne’s situation to have the same
animating object in view, the same possibility of hope. Emma divined what every body present must be
thinking. Her mind did
become settled, but it was settled in a gloomy dejection. He liked very much to
have his friends come and see him; and from various united causes, from
his long residence at Hartfield, and his good nature, from his fortune,
his house, and his daughter, he could command the visits of his own
little circle, in a great measure, as he liked. That his understanding has no brilliancy, his feelings no
ardour, and his voice no expression.”

“You decide on his imperfections so much in the mass,” replied Elinor,
“and so much on the strength of your own imagination, that the
commendation _I_ am able to give of him is comparatively cold and
insipid. Jane, don’t you remember
grandmama’s telling us of it when we got home? This cannot be! He is to be married very soon—a
good-for-nothing fellow! One is sick of the very name of Jane Fairfax. But I thought I would just tell you of this, because I knew
how much it must please you. It
may make many things intelligible and excusable which now are not to be
understood. This is precisely what I wanted. John Knightley here asked Emma quietly whether there were any
doubts of the air of Randalls. Mrs. Weston’s shall clear him and his next neighbour. Knightley was then obliged to say
that he should be glad to see him; and Mr. She sighed
for the air, the liberty, the quiet of the country; and fancied that if
any place could give her ease, Barton must do it. “I was only going to observe, that though such unfortunate
circumstances do sometimes occur both to men and women, I cannot
imagine them to be very frequent. Jennings’s active zeal in the cause of society,
procured her some other new acquaintance to see and observe. Knightley’s answer was the most distinct. The moment of her
release from him was ecstasy. The situation of the house was good. CHAPTER XV


Emma was not required, by any subsequent discovery, to retract her ill
opinion of Mrs. Charlotte is an
excellent manager, I dare say. By Mrs. Jennings left them earlier than usual; for she could not be easy
till the Middletons and Palmers were able to grieve as much as herself;
and positively refusing Elinor’s offered attendance, went out alone for
the rest of the morning. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five
daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. All that she wants
is gossip, and she only likes me now because I supply it.”

Elinor had not needed this to be assured of the injustice to which her
sister was often led in her opinion of others, by the irritable
refinement of her own mind, and the too great importance placed by her
on the delicacies of a strong sensibility, and the graces of a polished
manner. I do not know a place in the country that is
equal to Netherfield. I hope he will not mind it so very much.”

“Let us think of those among our absent friends who are more cheerfully
employed,” cried Emma. Lord! She would be a loser in
every way. Well, at last, as I need not tell you, you were forced on me; and what
a sweet figure I cut! The younger girls formed hopes of _coming out_ a year or two
sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved
from their apprehension of Charlotte’s dying an old maid. She saw them in
an instant in their parsonage-house; saw in Lucy, the active,
contriving manager, uniting at once a desire of smart appearance with
the utmost frugality, and ashamed to be suspected of half her
economical practices;—pursuing her own interest in every thought,
courting the favour of Colonel Brandon, of Mrs. There were wishes
at Randalls respecting Emma’s destiny, but it was not desirable to have
them suspected; and the quiet transition which Mr. and Mrs. I used to think she was not capable of being fond of any
body, except herself: but she has always been kind to him (in her
way—allowing for little whims and caprices, and expecting every thing
to be as she likes). Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment
of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many
of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on
the business. I have been silent from surprize merely, excessive surprize. His manners, however, must
have been unmarked, wavering, dubious, or she could not have been so
misled. Weston’s fault that the number of privy
councillors was not yet larger. Emma felt they were friends
again; and the conviction giving her at first great satisfaction, and
then a little sauciness, she could not help saying, as he was admiring
the baby,

“What a comfort it is, that we think alike about our nephews and
nieces. In her own past
behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret: and in
the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin. Mr. “He will have every body’s wishes for his happiness.”

“He is very young to settle,” was Mr. Dixon’s
affections from his wife, or of any thing mischievous which her
imagination had suggested at first. Had he _not_ told me as an
inducement that you and your sister were to be there, I should have
felt it too certain a thing, to trust myself near him. As long as they lived, no
exertions would be necessary, their home might be hers for ever; and
for their own comfort they would have retained her wholly; but this
would be selfishness:—what must be at last, had better be soon. Were it known to the rest
of my family I should not have merely my own gratitude to express.”

“I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,” replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise
and emotion, “that you have ever been informed of what may, in a
mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. Bingley and his eldest
sister, to observe the game. Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of a
great opposition of character. Mr. The day of his and Lydia’s departure soon came; and Mrs. The dear
Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy
seemed to feel it most acutely--more, I think, than last year. If this is living in the country, it is nothing very
formidable. At length the Parsonage was discernible. Jane was quite longing to go to Ireland, from his account of
things.”

At this moment, an ingenious and animating suspicion entering Emma’s
brain with regard to Jane Fairfax, this charming Mr. Jennings,
however, with a kindness of heart which made Elinor really love her,
declared her resolution of not stirring from Cleveland as long as
Marianne remained ill, and of endeavouring, by her own attentive care,
to supply to her the place of the mother she had taken her from; and
Elinor found her on every occasion a most willing and active helpmate,
desirous to share in all her fatigues, and often by her better
experience in nursing, of material use. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should form
such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or
friendless, and who was actually staying in his Colonel’s family, that I
am strongly inclined to hope the best. They are such
charming women!—I am sure if ever you tell your sister what I think of
her, you cannot speak too high.”

But Elinor would not give her any encouragement to hope that she
_should_ tell her sister. And such a noble fire!—I am quite roasted. Elton’s intentions. A thousand things may arise in six months.”

The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost
contempt. If Jane repressed her for a little time, she soon
began again; and though much that passed between them was in a
half-whisper, especially on Mrs. Miss Bingley moved with alacrity to
the pianoforte, and after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the
way, which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she
seated herself. Had I remained in England, perhaps—but I meant to promote
the happiness of both by removing from her for years, and for that
purpose had procured my exchange. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last
night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. It appears to
me a most perfect resemblance in every feature. In anticipating the happiness of
Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he
continued the conversation till they reached the house. Dashwood, after a short pause, “of
_Robert’s_ marrying Miss Morton.”

Elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive importance of her brother’s
tone, calmly replied,—

“The lady, I suppose, has no choice in the affair.”

“Choice!—how do you mean?”

“I only mean that I suppose, from your manner of speaking, it must be
the same to Miss Morton whether she marry Edward or Robert.”

“Certainly, there can be no difference; for Robert will now to all
intents and purposes be considered as the eldest son;—and as to any
thing else, they are both very agreeable young men: I do not know that
one is superior to the other.”

Elinor said no more, and John was also for a short time silent.—His
reflections ended thus. Here was a
dangerous opening. “And who was this
uncle? To Miss——


CHARADE. when a gallant young man, like Mr. Weston, and Mr. “Such an extraordinary dream of mine!” he cried. Edward had been staying several weeks in the house before he engaged
much of Mrs. He could not help
seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in
the room. A narrow passage led directly
through the house into the garden behind. The list she drew up
when only fourteen—I remember thinking it did her judgment so much
credit, that I preserved it some time; and I dare say she may have made
out a very good list now. She had no visible friends but what had been acquired at Highbury, and
was now just returned from a long visit in the country to some young
ladies who had been at school there with her. Woodhouse’s
entertainment. Weston could only approve. It would be a great comfort to Mr. Let his behaviour be the guide of your sensations. Such schemes as these are nothing without
numbers. Bennet to find comfort in staying at home at any period of her life. Elton gratitude for her
attentions to Miss Fairfax.—I hope this history of my conduct towards
her will be admitted by you and my father as great extenuation of what
you saw amiss. We must allow for the effect of shade, you know.”

“You have made her too tall, Emma,” said Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the
hand, “that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the
man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their
favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second or even a
third time. “I am sure,” said she, “I have no doubt in the world of your faithfully
keeping this secret, because you must know of what importance it is to
us, not to have it reach his mother; for she would never approve of it,
I dare say. Jennings enforced the necessity. Weston, but on your account. “Ought to refuse him! That they might
have met without ill consequence is, perhaps, probable; but his regard
did not appear to me enough extinguished for him to see her without some
danger. He coloured, seemed perplexed, looked doubtingly, and,
after some hesitation, said,—

“Perhaps you mean—my brother—you mean Mrs.—Mrs. “Is there a felicity in the world,” said Marianne, “superior to
this?—Margaret, we will walk here at least two hours.”

Margaret agreed, and they pursued their way against the wind, resisting
it with laughing delight for about twenty minutes longer, when suddenly
the clouds united over their heads, and a driving rain set full in
their face. If this be the case, he deserves you. Collins by Jane’s introduction of him. Letters of business, too! He may spend the
evening with his dear William Larkins now if he likes.”

Mr. As soon as Mrs. Dashwood’s satisfaction, and to give her the dignity of
having, for the first time since her living at Barton, more company
with her than her house would hold. She wondered that Lucy’s spirits could be so very much elevated by the
civility of Mrs. “No, no, no,” cried Marianne wildly, “he loves you, and only you. The ball proceeded pleasantly. Bennet, alarmed. Harriet was farther unfortunate in the tone of her companions at Mrs. they will hear you.”

“Never mind if they do. I have not
heard of any thing to please me so well since Charlotte was brought to
bed.”

And away she went; but returning again in a moment,

“I have just been thinking of Betty’s sister, my dear. There, shut into her own room,
as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption
of all that she had heard. Knightley. He never
can bear to be thanked. Marianne lifted up her eyes in
astonishment, and Elinor conjectured that she might as well have held
her tongue. Willoughby since you
left him at Barton?”

“Yes,” he replied gravely, “once I have. But poor Mrs. Weston, and run away with it; as you have
many a time reproached me with doing. She counted the days
that must intervene before their invitation could be sent--hopeless of
seeing him before. and for _this_ we are to be
thankful. Weston.”

“You cannot see too much perfection in Mrs. So I said I would go down
and see, and Jane said, ‘Shall I go down instead? is not this an agreeable surprise?”

“And we mean to treat you all,” added Lydia; “but you must lend us the
money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.” Then showing
her purchases,--“Look here, I have bought this bonnet. Her colour changed, and she said
no more. Mrs. Oh! Churchill, _as_ _we_ _understand_, has not been able to leave the
sofa for a week together. A little
quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear. Why any fear of detection? Men of sense, whatever you may
chuse to say, do not want silly wives. Woodhouse—“indeed it
certainly is, so very superior to all other pork, that Emma and I
cannot have a greater pleasure than—”

“Oh! A bride, you
know, my dear, is always the first in company, let the others be who
they may.”

“Well, papa, if this is not encouragement to marry, I do not know what
is. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped
her turn was coming soon. The church _ought_ to have been my profession--I
was brought up for the church; and I should at this time have been in
possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we
were speaking of just now.”

“Indeed!”

“Yes--the late Mr. My mother’s are really very good indeed. In a fortnight they were to go, and once gone, she hoped
there could be nothing more to plague her on his account. I
     fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of his character,
     after all. By that time, Marianne was rather
better, and her mother leaving her to the care of Margaret and the
maid, returned to Elinor, who, though still much disordered, had so far
recovered the use of her reason and voice as to be just beginning an
inquiry of Thomas, as to the source of his intelligence. But you will do every thing right. “It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. The first part of Mrs. She had herself been first with him for
many years past. What Mrs. Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor,

“Get it all out of her, my dear. What an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream! My
intentions were not always wrong. I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or
other, and not disturb us with his company. Without supposing
them, from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference
of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and she
resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left
Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such
an attachment. Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction
took place. Tease him--laugh at him. Weston’s sanguine temper was a blessing on
all his upright and honourable exertions; but Mr. Mrs. “Dear, dear Norland!” said Marianne, as she wandered
alone before the house, on the last evening of their being there; “when
shall I cease to regret you!—when learn to feel a home elsewhere!—Oh! “I began to be afraid you would never come back again. Darcy was delighted with
their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of
it. Emma, your infatuation about that girl blinds you. The others have been gone on to Scarborough
these three weeks.”

She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse
with her, he might have better success. They read,
they talked, they sang together; his musical talents were considerable;
and he read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward had
unfortunately wanted. I knew enough of your disposition to be certain, that
had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine frankly and openly.”

Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, “Yes, you know enough of
my _frankness_ to believe me capable of _that_. Cole.”

“You will make my excuses, my dear, as civilly as possible. Elton, they were all taking the scheme as a particular compliment
to themselves.—Emma and Harriet professed very high expectations of
pleasure from it; and Mr. I do not mean to say, however, that you might not have made
discoveries.”

The conversation was here interrupted. He
had been sitting with her, it appeared, most companionably at home,
till her usual hour of exercise; and on being desired to chuse their
walk, immediately fixed on Highbury.—“He did not doubt there being very
pleasant walks in every direction, but if left to him, he should always
chuse the same. He said nothing worth hearing—looked
without seeing—admired without intelligence—listened without knowing
what she said. She
was soon convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling at all
apprehensive or embarrassed; it was for him. I hope we shall have her here
next week. Do not, my dearest Elinor, let
your kindness defend what I know your judgment must censure. Dixon
caught her.—It was the work of a moment. Bingley’s love?”

“I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite
inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Heaven and earth!--of
what are you thinking? Hurst and Mr. It was Garrick’s, you know.”

“Aye, very true.—I wish I could recollect more of it. If your
feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. Weston had set off to pay the visit in a good deal
of agitation herself; and in the first place had wished not to go at
all at present, to be allowed merely to write to Miss Fairfax instead,
and to defer this ceremonious call till a little time had passed, and
Mr. “It is Colonel Brandon!” said she, with vexation. Elton, who wants to be wiser and
wittier than all the world! And I have reproached you for being happy!”

“It was not fit that you should then know how much I was the reverse!”

“Four months!” cried Marianne again. and Mrs. His being such
a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from them,
were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was such a
comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of Jane, and to be
certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. Collins,” cried Elizabeth, with some warmth, “you puzzle me
exceedingly. Elton’s being a remarkably handsome man, with most agreeable manners;
and as she had no hesitation in following up the assurance of his
admiration by agreeable hints, she was soon pretty confident of
creating as much liking on Harriet’s side, as there could be any
occasion for. I am all amazement! Do you know how
Miss Bates and her niece came here?”

“How?—They were invited, were not they?”

“Oh! It is only the Palmers. Send back your answer as soon as you can,
     and be careful to write explicitly. I cannot
keep my eyes from it. There was instant pleasure in the sight
of them, and still greater pleasure was conveyed in sound—for Mr. As soon as they returned to the carriage, Mrs. Mr. Your lively talents would place you in the
greatest danger in an unequal marriage. Yet
after a time I _did_ say, for at first I was quite overcome, that if
she lived, as I trusted she might, my greatest happiness would lie in
promoting their marriage; and since our arrival, since our delightful
security, I have repeated it to him more fully, have given him every
encouragement in my power. Oh! You know very well
that my opinion would have no weight with you, unless it were on the
side of your wishes.”

“Indeed you wrong me,” replied Lucy, with great solemnity; “I know
nobody of whose judgment I think so highly as I do of yours; and I do
really believe, that if you was to say to me, ‘I advise you by all
means to put an end to your engagement with Edward Ferrars, it will be
more for the happiness of both of you,’ I should resolve upon doing it
immediately.”

Elinor blushed for the insincerity of Edward’s future wife, and
replied, “This compliment would effectually frighten me from giving any
opinion on the subject had I formed one. Martin looked as if he did not know what manner was. “Indeed, you are mistaken, madam; I have not been at all able to account
for the honour of seeing you here.”

“Miss Bennet,” replied her Ladyship, in an angry tone, “you ought to
know that I am not to be trifled with. How very odd! Mr. “Next time you call,” said she, “I hope we shall be more lucky.”

He should be particularly happy at any time, etc., etc.; and if she
would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on
them. Do
not distress her.”

He shook his head with a smile, and looked as if he had very little
doubt and very little mercy. When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Mr. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything
else, awakened a suspicion of the truth. A glass of wine; shall I get you one? This decided the matter at once. Elton was not the
superior creature she had believed him. “The first wish of my heart,” said she to herself, “is never more to be
in company with either of them. Marianne began now to perceive that the desperation which had seized
her at sixteen and a half, of ever seeing a man who could satisfy her
ideas of perfection, had been rash and unjustifiable. Nothing hastily done; nothing
incomplete. Goddard a beautiful goose—the finest goose Mrs. The pause was to Elizabeth’s feelings
dreadful. How do you like
it?—Selina’s choice—handsome, I think, but I do not know whether it is
not over-trimmed; I have the greatest dislike to the idea of being
over-trimmed—quite a horror of finery. Collins and me have a little conversation together.”

Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but
Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,
detained first by the civility of Mr. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the
world. Not that I think Mr. Elton knows you.”

“Yes: but a young lady—a bride—I ought to have paid my respects to her
if possible. And when the party entered the
assembly-room, it consisted of only five altogether: Mr. and Mrs. I found that
Miss Darcy was expected to dinner: I wish I could see her. They have no mercy on
her.”

Miss Bates, in her real anxiety for Jane, could hardly stay even to be
grateful, before she stept forward and put an end to all farther
singing. Mrs. Jane instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such
premeditation, and her entreaty that _she_ would not give in to it. Wickham,
he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball
was, at any rate, a ball. Mr. “It is one thing,” said she, presently—her cheeks in a glow—“to have
very good sense in a common way, like every body else, and if there is
any thing to say, to sit down and write a letter, and say just what you
must, in a short way; and another, to write verses and charades like
this.”

Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of Mr. “Well,” said
she, “and you soon silenced Mr. Cole does not know how to shew her
kindness enough; and I must say that Jane deserves it as much as any
body can. If
that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.”

But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly
relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an
article of news which then began to be in circulation. You will have a charming mother-in-law, indeed, and
of course she will be always at Pemberley with you.”

He listened to her with perfect indifference, while she chose to
entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her
that all was safe, her wit flowed along. Let my
father’s servant go with you.—Let me order the carriage. Dashwood first
spoke. (in a tone of wonder and pity,) I had no idea that the law had
been so great a slavery. She felt it to be the
probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Jennings, I spent two happy hours with him yesterday afternoon, he
would not hear of our parting, though earnestly did I, as I thought my
duty required, urge him to it for prudence sake, and would have parted
for ever on the spot, would he consent to it; but he said it should
never be, he did not regard his mother’s anger, while he could have my
affections; our prospects are not very bright, to be sure, but we must
wait, and hope for the best; he will be ordained shortly; and should it
ever be in your power to recommend him to any body that has a living to
bestow, am very sure you will not forget us, and dear Mrs. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had
a few minutes’ conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever
prevailed on to get out. Elizabeth had mentioned her
name to her mother on her Ladyship’s entrance, though no request of
introduction had been made. Jennings, though her carriage was
always at Elinor’s service, so very much disliked Mrs. and Miss Bates. There,
however, he is quite mistaken. His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece;
and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. In his library he had been
always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told
Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room in the
house, he was used to be free from them there: his civility, therefore,
was most prompt in inviting Mr. She was just as determined when the morrow came, and went early, that
nothing might prevent her. Cole’s note—no, it cannot be more than five—or at least
ten—for I had got my bonnet and spencer on, just ready to come out—I
was only gone down to speak to Patty again about the pork—Jane was
standing in the passage—were not you, Jane?—for my mother was so afraid
that we had not any salting-pan large enough. First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the
present occasion; and, secondly, of my room. A few awkward moments
passed, and he sat down again; and in a more determined manner said,

“It was something to feel that all the rest of my time might be given
to Hartfield. But she had
promised to hear him, and her curiosity no less than her honor was
engaged. From a reverie of this kind, as she sat at her drawing-table, she was
roused one morning, soon after Edward’s leaving them, by the arrival of
company. Elinor, too, was deeply afflicted; but still she could struggle, she
could exert herself. Dixon, I felt how much more probable that
it should be the tribute of warm female friendship. He
had gone away deeply offended—he came back engaged to another—and to
another as superior, of course, to the first, as under such
circumstances what is gained always is to what is lost. But Mr. In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
nothing, she walked on; but it would not do: in half a minute the letter
was unfolded again; and collecting herself as well as she could, she
again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and
commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence. Marianne’s ideas were still, at intervals, fixed incoherently on her
mother, and whenever she mentioned her name, it gave a pang to the
heart of poor Elinor, who, reproaching herself for having trifled with
so many days of illness, and wretched for some immediate relief,
fancied that all relief might soon be in vain, that every thing had
been delayed too long, and pictured to herself her suffering mother
arriving too late to see this darling child, or to see her rational. Should she proceed no
farther?—should she let it pass, and seem to suspect nothing?—Perhaps
Harriet might think her cold or angry if she did; or perhaps if she
were totally silent, it might only drive Harriet into asking her to
hear too much; and against any thing like such an unreserve as had
been, such an open and frequent discussion of hopes and chances, she
was perfectly resolved.—She believed it would be wiser for her to say
and know at once, all that she meant to say and know. Elinor was disappointed too; but at the same time her
regard for Colonel Brandon ensured his welcome with her; and she felt
particularly hurt that a man so partial to her sister should perceive
that she experienced nothing but grief and disappointment in seeing
him. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and
she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and
having very frequent parties at home. Knightley;’ and, from
habit, it has not so very formal a sound.—And yet it is formal. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his
character, could be capable of it. It would be dreadful! But do you think she would
be prevailed on to go back with us? What a delightful library you have at
Pemberley, Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was
extreme. I assure you that I have long been most heartily ashamed of it.”

Darcy mentioned his letter. Would they only have laughed at her about the Doctor! Such a very kind attention—and so thoughtful an
attention!—the sort of thing that so few men would think of. My poor little girl would be sadly
disappointed, I know, if the basket was not finished tomorrow, for
though I told her it certainly would not, I am sure she depends upon
having it done.”

Lucy directly drew her work table near her and reseated herself with an
alacrity and cheerfulness which seemed to infer that she could taste no
greater delight than in making a filigree basket for a spoilt child. “No; but it must be done soon.”

Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he
wrote. no—I am grieved to find—I was on the point of telling you that
when I called at Mrs. Oh! In
her mother she lost the only person able to cope with her. As Marianne’s affection
for her mother was sincere, it must triumph with little difficulty,
over the imaginary evils she had started. Emma wondered on what, of all the medley, she would fix. But now
there is one good thing, we shall be able to meet, and meet pretty
often, for Lady Middleton’s delighted with Mrs. We
may well say that ‘our lot is cast in a goodly heritage.’ Well, Mr. Mrs. and Miss Bates occupied
the drawing-room floor; and there, in the very moderate-sized
apartment, which was every thing to them, the visitors were most
cordially and even gratefully welcomed; the quiet neat old lady, who
with her knitting was seated in the warmest corner, wanting even to
give up her place to Miss Woodhouse, and her more active, talking
daughter, almost ready to overpower them with care and kindness, thanks
for their visit, solicitude for their shoes, anxious inquiries after
Mr. Knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he cared to
express; and before he could make any reply, Mr. “I felt myself,” she added, “to be as solemnly engaged to him, as if
the strictest legal covenant had bound us to each other.”

“I can believe it,” said Elinor; “but unfortunately he did not feel the
same.”

“He _did_ feel the same, Elinor—for weeks and weeks he felt it. Harriet Smith refuse Robert Martin? At that moment she cared for no other. You are afraid of giving me
trouble; but I assure you, my dear Jane, the Campbells can hardly be
more interested about you than I am. Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world; and
everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the
appearance of his goodness. Ferrars.”

“I am sorry I do _not_,” said Elinor, in great astonishment, “if it
could be of any use to YOU to know my opinion of her. As they approached Barton, indeed, and entered on scenes of which every
field and every tree brought some peculiar, some painful recollection,
she grew silent and thoughtful, and turning away her face from their
notice, sat earnestly gazing through the window. Lydia, my love, though you _are_
the youngest, I dare say Mr. Tell me that not
only your house will remain the same, but that I shall ever find you
and yours as unchanged as your dwelling; and that you will always
consider me with the kindness which has made everything belonging to
you so dear to me.”

The promise was readily given, and Willoughby’s behaviour during the
whole of the evening declared at once his affection and happiness. The house was handsome, and handsomely fitted up, and the young ladies
were immediately put in possession of a very comfortable apartment. I remember Fanny used to say that she would marry sooner
and better than you did; not but what she is exceedingly fond of _you_,
but so it happened to strike her. Knightley. hardly could I believe the melancholy and sickly figure
before me, to be the remains of the lovely, blooming, healthful girl,
on whom I had once doted. I am not to be intimidated into
anything so wholly unreasonable. Mrs. It is the fault of
her face that she has them not.”

“Do you think so?” replied he. Colonel Brandon’s delicate, unobtrusive enquiries were never unwelcome
to Miss Dashwood. To me it would seem only
a commercial exchange, in which each wished to be benefited at the
expense of the other.”

“It would be impossible, I know,” replied Elinor, “to convince you that
a woman of seven and twenty could feel for a man of thirty-five
anything near enough to love, to make him a desirable companion to her. Nobody thought of Hannah till you
mentioned her—James is so obliged to you!”

“I am very glad I did think of her. Mr. Used only to a large house himself, and without ever thinking
how many advantages and accommodations were attached to its size, he
could be no judge of the privations inevitably belonging to a small
one. Philips, the Lucases, and all
their other neighbours, and to hear herself called “Mrs. Frank Churchill’s
situation, you would be able to say and do just what you have been
recommending for him; and it might have a very good effect. Ferrars, I do think
it is not worth while to wait two or three months for him. And there would be poor Emma in the carriage behind. “It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my Lady, I dare say; but, I
assure you, it is much larger than Sir William Lucas’s.”

“This must be a most inconvenient sitting-room for the evening in
summer: the windows are full west.”

Mrs. The heat even would be danger.—You are fatigued already.”

“I am,”—she answered—“I am fatigued; but it is not the sort of
fatigue—quick walking will refresh me.—Miss Woodhouse, we all know at
times what it is to be wearied in spirits. But when this passed away, when
her spirits became collected, when she saw that to the perfect
good-breeding of the gentleman, he united frankness and vivacity, and
above all, when she heard him declare, that of music and dancing he was
passionately fond, she gave him such a look of approbation as secured
the largest share of his discourse to herself for the rest of his stay. Perry did say so. Woodhouse’s drawing-room, and the smiles
of his lovely daughter, was in no danger of being thrown away. Martin had
told her one day (and there was a blush as she said it,) that it was
impossible for any body to be a better son, and therefore she was sure,
whenever he married, he would make a good husband. It was short, but expressed good sense, warm attachment,
liberality, propriety, even delicacy of feeling. Miss Bennet was therefore
established as a sweet girl; and their brother felt authorized by such
commendation to think of her as he chose. Darcy had been, was much
relieved by discerning such different feelings. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I
hope, though you have but a short lease.”

“Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he; “and therefore if I
should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five
minutes. Their means were as different
as their objects, and equally suited to the advancement of each. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. With amazement did
she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power;
and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation to
give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man in
the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again. Cole’s door; and was pleased to
see that it was Mr. Her situation should secure your compassion. One hears sometimes of a child being ‘the picture of health;’
now, Emma always gives me the idea of being the complete picture of
grown-up health. I care not
who knows that I am wretched. Ferrars would be reformed, and her son be at liberty to be happy. Knightley, comprehended many
such. “I do pity you. “It is so, indeed,” continued Mr. And books!—Thomson, Cowper, Scott—she
would buy them all over and over again: she would buy up every copy, I
believe, to prevent their falling into unworthy hands; and she would
have every book that tells her how to admire an old twisted tree. CHAPTER II


Jane Fairfax was an orphan, the only child of Mrs. What is all this?”

“She had engaged to go as governess to Mrs. That, I thought, in a man of known musical talent, was some proof.”

“Proof indeed!” said Emma, highly amused.—“Mr. On each side of the entrance
was a sitting room, about sixteen feet square; and beyond them were the
offices and the stairs. But on her returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished,
she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her
mother had been too ingenious for her. All manner of solemn nonsense was talked on the
subject, but I believed none of it. One set might recommend
their all removing to Donwell, and leaving Hartfield for the John
Knightleys; and another might predict disagreements among their
servants; but yet, upon the whole, there was no serious objection
raised, except in one habitation, the Vicarage.—There, the surprize was
not softened by any satisfaction. “Wickham so
very bad! The disappointment of the evening before seemed forgotten in the
expectation of what was to happen that day. But the
sight of Mr. “When the weather is settled, and I have recovered my strength,” said
she, “we will take long walks together every day. It is yet too early in
life to despair of such a happiness. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied
with only one. The very thing that we have always been
rather afraid of; for we should not have liked to have her at such a
distance from us, for months together—not able to come if any thing was
to happen. At
Hartfield, you have had very good specimens of well educated, well bred
men. Considering everything, therefore, I
hope, foolish as our engagement was, foolish as it has since in every
way been proved, it was not at the time an unnatural or an inexcusable
piece of folly.”

The change which a few hours had wrought in the minds and the happiness
of the Dashwoods, was such—so great—as promised them all, the
satisfaction of a sleepless night. She understood their ways,
could allow for their ignorance and their temptations, had no romantic
expectations of extraordinary virtue from those for whom education had
done so little; entered into their troubles with ready sympathy, and
always gave her assistance with as much intelligence as good-will. “FITZWILLIAM DARCY.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXXVI. She would not allow the presence of Lucy, nor the
consciousness of some injustice towards herself, to deter her from
saying that she was happy to see him, and that she had very much
regretted being from home, when he called before in Berkeley Street. How could his
will be disregarded? Gardiner that he
     had found out where your sister and Mr. We must do whatever is to be done
quickest, and I think our feelings will lose no time there. I’m
sure there’s a vast many smart beaux in Exeter; but you know, how could
I tell what smart beaux there might be about Norland; and I was only
afraid the Miss Dashwoods might find it dull at Barton, if they had not
so many as they used to have. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew
to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last
partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Why else should he have shown such unwillingness to accept
your invitation here?”

“It was not inclination that he wanted, Elinor; I could plainly see
_that_. Smith was there, and with
no other companion than Mr. I
wish—I heartily wish it had never been. He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologized for his
intrusion, by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies to
be within. But, my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Weston looked up, afraid to believe; but Emma’s countenance was as
steady as her words. I shall never forget it. “This would soon have led to something better, of course,” was her
consoling reflection; “any thing interests between those who love; and
any thing will serve as introduction to what is near the heart. to be sure I do. They seemed more like cheerful, easy friends, than lovers. We will not be
severe.”

“It will be natural for me,” he added shortly afterwards, “to speak my
opinion aloud as I read. I am quite ready. Emma’s comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried on, by Harriet’s
being to stay longer; her fortnight was likely to be a month at least. “Good gracious!” cried Maria, after a few minutes’ silence, “it seems
but a day or two since we first came! Bennet,
     I am inclined to think that her own disposition must be naturally
     bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an
     age. “I suppose you have heard of the handsome letter Mr. If you’ll believe
me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a
fortnight. Woodhouse’s family and wanted another
situation; I do not think you would have spoken a good word for me to
any body. Weston, to whom and to Highbury he seemed to take very cordially. As soon as
they were out of the house, his enquiries began. Mrs. Yet she could not
bear this silence. But it would have been more like Willoughby to acknowledge them at
once. Their housekeeping will be
nothing at all. All that I can promise you, therefore, is
not to be in a hurry. Two obstacles of the
five being thus removed, Mrs. She had heard and seen it all; and felt some curiosity to know whether
the wet walk of this morning had produced any. Ferrars. Observe her eyes, as she is looking up at my father.—You will
be glad to hear (inclining his head, and whispering seriously) that my
uncle means to give her all my aunt’s jewels. And as to
conceit, he is the farthest from it of any man I know. I
have an idea he was standing just here.”

“Ah! Woodhouse. Dashwood, trusting to the temperate account of her own disappointment
which Elinor had sent her, was led away by the exuberance of her joy to
think only of what would increase it. Martin’s having “_two_ parlours, two very good
parlours, indeed; one of them quite as large as Mrs. Dashwood recommended, with all the strength and urgency which illness
could command, the interest of his mother-in-law and sisters. This only need be said;—that when they all sat down to table at
four o’clock, about three hours after his arrival, he had secured his
lady, engaged her mother’s consent, and was not only in the rapturous
profession of the lover, but, in the reality of reason and truth, one
of the happiest of men. ‘Oh!’
said he, ‘I can fasten the rivet. There was no reason to suppose Mr. I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire will
not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.”

“Oh no--it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mr. She is known only as
parlour-boarder at a common school. As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
ordered; and, after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their
boxes, workbags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty’s and
Lydia’s purchases, were seated in it. Bennet would have been
very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was
not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her
restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. Every thing tender and charming
was to mark their parting; but still they were to part. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss
Bingley’s appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all
attended her into the breakfast parlour. And,
by what I understand, you might have had lodgings there quite away from
the sea—a quarter of a mile off—very comfortable. But last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my
notice. How can she find any appellation for them, deep enough
in familiar vulgarity? It is useless to talk of it.”

It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood
perfectly ignorant of what had happened. But that was not smart enough for my family. I was fatigued. It
does not bear talking of.” And for a little while she hoped he would
not talk of it, and that a silent rumination might suffice to restore
him to the relish of his own smooth gruel. Nothing escaped _her_
minute observation and general curiosity; she saw every thing, and
asked every thing; was never easy till she knew the price of every part
of Marianne’s dress; could have guessed the number of her gowns
altogether with better judgment than Marianne herself, and was not
without hopes of finding out before they parted, how much her washing
cost per week, and how much she had every year to spend upon herself. We do not live a great way from him in the
country, you know. Weston were safe and well. He began speaking of Harriet, and speaking of her with more
voluntary praise than Emma had ever heard before. Those who chose to be
idle certainly might.”

“Ay, no doubt: but that is what a governess will prevent; and if I had
known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage
one. With an air of indifference, he soon afterwards added, “How long did you
say that he was at Rosings?”

“Nearly three weeks.”

“And you saw him frequently?”

“Yes, almost every day.”

“His manners are very different from his cousin’s.”

“Yes, very different; but I think Mr. Elton.”

Miss Bates would hardly give Emma time to say how perfectly new this
circumstance was to her; but as without supposing it possible that she
could be ignorant of any of the particulars of Mr. Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakes
of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. This observation would not have prevented her
from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an
inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity
of saying much: her own thoughts were employing her. I happened to look up
as I went by the chaise, and so I see directly it was the youngest Miss
Steele; so I took off my hat, and she knew me and called to me, and
inquired after you, ma’am, and the young ladies, especially Miss
Marianne, and bid me I should give her compliments and Mr. I shall have no fortune, and I fancy she is an exceeding
proud woman.”

“I certainly did not seek your confidence,” said Elinor; “but you do me
no more than justice in imagining that I may be depended on. Weston. Elinor had just been congratulating herself, in the midst of her
perplexity, that however difficult it might be to express herself
properly by letter, it was at least preferable to giving the
information by word of mouth, when her visitor entered, to force her
upon this greatest exertion of all. Jennings’s advice, of sending
for the Palmers’ apothecary. [Illustration]

The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. dear, no, never.”

No sooner was she out of sight, than Emma exclaimed,

“What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be! “I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness;
or me either, for that matter. My business
was to declare myself a scoundrel, and whether I did it with a bow or a
bluster was of little importance. Mrs. Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her
father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their
united volubility. Miss Woodhouse, I would rather done any thing than have it happen: and
yet, you know, there was a sort of satisfaction in seeing him behave so
pleasantly and so kindly. My temper
would perhaps be called resentful. [Illustration]

Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of
Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned
in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter. He had just dismounted: she could not be
mistaken,—it _was_ Edward. Their conversation was soon afterwards closed by the entrance of her
father. Darcy;--that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so
many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes
might arise unpleasant to more than myself.”

She highly approved his forbearance; and they had leisure for a full
discussion of it, and for all the commendations which they civilly
bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with
them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to her. She could not flatter herself with any
idea of blindness in his attachment to _her_. “Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?” said she. Campbell.”

“Very true, very true, indeed. “Mr. Knightley! Their manner of living, even when the
restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the
extreme. However, I think
it answered so far as to tempt one to go again. Elton!—The stain of illegitimacy, unbleached
by nobility or wealth, would have been a stain indeed. Knightley, that there
can be no use in canvassing it. Knightley to her and her father, the same Mr. [Illustration]

Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners were very much admired at the Parsonage,
and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasure of
their engagements at Rosings. But did you never see him? Woodhouse hesitated.—“Not near so often, my dear, as I could wish.”

“Oh! (Laughing affectedly.)—No, no; they were shut up in
the drawing-room together, and all I heard was only by listening at the
door.”

“How!” cried Elinor; “have you been repeating to me what you only
learnt yourself by listening at the door? Stay, stay, I will go myself. Woodhouse could not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in
the fogs of December. The truth
of this representation there was no denying. You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done
     for the young people. [Illustration]

Mr. It does relate to him, and I will tell you directly;”
(resuming her work, and seeming resolved against looking up.) “He has
been here this very morning, on a most extraordinary errand. The Palmers were to remove to Cleveland about
the end of March, for the Easter holidays; and Mrs. I wish you could have heard how she talked of it—with what
candour and generosity. ‘I did not make the allowances,’ said she, ‘which I ought
to have done, for his temper and spirits—his delightful spirits, and
that gaiety, that playfulness of disposition, which, under any other
circumstances, would, I am sure, have been as constantly bewitching to
me, as they were at first.’ She then began to speak of you, and of the
great kindness you had shewn her during her illness; and with a blush
which shewed me how it was all connected, desired me, whenever I had an
opportunity, to thank you—I could not thank you too much—for every wish
and every endeavour to do her good. I was very much pleased with all that he said. Mary’s powers were by no means fitted for such a display;
her voice was weak, and her manner affected. You are the worst judge in the world, Mr. At present I will not say more, but, perhaps,
when we are better acquainted----”

He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each
other. His character is thereby complete.”

“I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. The good understanding
between the Colonel and Miss Dashwood seemed rather to declare that the
honours of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the yew arbour, would all
be made over to _her;_ and Mrs. Find such a woman as soon as
you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.’ Allow me, by the
way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and
kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the
advantages in my power to offer. She felt all the perverseness of the
mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought; and, to
prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him, at first,
that it was a favourite haunt of hers. “I certainly must,” said she. A conundrum of Mr. _Courtship_—a very good hint. “It
must be a severe trial to them all. There was not
a dissentient voice on the subject, either when Mrs. The second began. Could he have Colonel
Fitzwilliam in his thoughts? Elton. Elinor found, when the evening was over, that disposition is not
materially altered by a change of abode, for although scarcely settled
in town, Sir John had contrived to collect around him, nearly twenty
young people, and to amuse them with a ball. Don’t
disturb him. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at
whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. Harriet unfolded the parcel, and she looked on with impatience. Woodhouse had so completely made up his mind to the visit, that in
spite of the increasing coldness, he seemed to have no idea of
shrinking from it, and set forward at last most punctually with his
eldest daughter in his own carriage, with less apparent consciousness
of the weather than either of the others; too full of the wonder of his
own going, and the pleasure it was to afford at Randalls to see that it
was cold, and too well wrapt up to feel it. Wherever they went, she was evidently always on the watch. He had been used to think her
unjust to Jane, and had now great pleasure in marking an improvement. If you are a good
girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of
them.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XLIX. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual
philosophic composure. All looked up to them. Collins,
when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had
passed before any of the family. He re-urged—she
re-declined; and he seemed then about to make his bow, when taking the
paper from the table, she returned it—

“Oh! There
is nothing he would not do for her.”

The picture gallery, and two or three of the principal bed-rooms, were
all that remained to be shown. But you, you above all, above
my mother, had been wronged by me. Dashwood was convinced. The closing of the little
gate, at the entrance of the green court in front of the house, drew
her eyes to the window, and she saw a large party walking up to the
door. But colds were never so prevalent as they have been
this autumn. But after all the
punishment that misconduct can bring, it is still not less misconduct. “Oh! Woodhouse, I wish
you had heard his gallant speeches to me at dinner. Darcy, whose
reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at
being so addressed was very evident. Elton, but to Miss Woodhouse, as the latter plainly saw. Bennet,” replied his wife, “how can you be so tiresome? As my mother-in-law’s relations, I
shall be happy to show them every respect. Bates, let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs. what should hinder it?”—but checking her
desire, confined herself to this silent ejaculation. Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; and he
     went to her for intelligence of him, as soon as he got to town. You do not know
how many candidates there always are for the _first_ situations. and Marianne, still talking wildly of mama, her
alarm increased so rapidly, as to determine her on sending instantly
for Mr. “This is a parade,” cried he, “which does one good; it gives such an
elegance to misfortune! Let
us wait, therefore, for this letter. Woodhouse was
safely conveyed in his carriage, with one window down, to partake of
this al-fresco party; and in one of the most comfortable rooms in the
Abbey, especially prepared for him by a fire all the morning, he was
happily placed, quite at his ease, ready to talk with pleasure of what
had been achieved, and advise every body to come and sit down, and not
to heat themselves.—Mrs. Jennings had, for some time ceased to
think at all of Mrs. Elizabeth, however, did not choose
to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the
consequence of any reply. The party, like
other musical parties, comprehended a great many people who had real
taste for the performance, and a great many more who had none at all;
and the performers themselves were, as usual, in their own estimation,
and that of their immediate friends, the first private performers in
England. you know who I mean.”

“I am particularly sorry, ma’am,” said he, addressing Lady Middleton,
“that I should receive this letter today, for it is on business which
requires my immediate attendance in town.”

“In town!” cried Mrs. I made her take her shawl—for the evenings are not
warm—her large new shawl— Mrs. The clock struck eight. I am
afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and
interest, for him to be guilty of it. No, not if it were to be by the side of Barton covert,
and they were kept watching for two hours together. why yourselves, and the Careys, and Whitakers to be sure.—What! They
are my old friends. He presently added, with a smile,

“I do not pretend to fix on times or places, but I must tell you that I
have good reason to believe your little friend will soon hear of
something to her advantage.”

“Indeed! Colonel Fitzwilliam had called
at the Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy’s eyes were fixed
on her. Knightley by her side. Your telling it will
be the greatest act of friendship that can be shown Marianne. He is an excellent young man, and will suit Harriet
exactly; it will be an ‘Exactly so,’ as he says himself; but he does
sigh and languish, and study for compliments rather more than I could
endure as a principal. “Yet it certainly
soon will happen. He was looking about, he was going to
the door, he was watching for the sound of other carriages,—impatient
to begin, or afraid of being always near her. Churchill, independent of his
wife, was feared by nobody; an easy, guidable man, to be persuaded into
any thing by his nephew. Time
will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not within the
daily circle—but that is not the change I had in view for you. [Illustration:

“With an affectionate smile”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]




CHAPTER LI. His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment. At last the affair was decided. I _will_ read you the passage which
particularly hurts me. and Mrs. Thy ready wit the word will soon supply. can this be possible!”

“Well may you wonder, Marianne,” replied her brother, “at the obstinacy
which could resist such arguments as these. I consider one as including the other. She is all affability and condescension, and I
doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when
service is over. There is not a
finer county in England than Derbyshire.”

“With all my heart: I will buy Pemberley itself, if Darcy will sell it.”

“I am talking of possibilities, Charles.”

“Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get
Pemberley by purchase than by imitation.”

Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to leave her very little
attention for her book; and, soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near
the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Nothing should tempt _her_ to go,
if they did; and she regretted that her father’s known habits would be
giving her refusal less meaning than she could wish. Darcy, drawing near
Elizabeth, said to her,--

“Do you not feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an
opportunity of dancing a reel?”

She smiled, but made no answer. Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and, while able to
suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was
ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very
sincerely wish him happy. I always stand up for women—and I assure you,
if you knew how Selina feels with respect to sleeping at an inn, you
would not wonder at Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and
curtailed its extent. She observed
in a low voice, to her mother, that they were probably going down to
Mr. “I honour his sincerity. But I dare not
hope it. “I have heard,” said he, with great compassion, “of the injustice your
friend Mr. I will go directly to Mr. He did not know what they had best do. Goddard chose to tell her; and looked no farther. Mrs. Martin?”

“Oh! I
had depended on her fortitude too far, and the blow was a severe
one—but had her marriage been happy, so young as I then was, a few
months must have reconciled me to it, or at least I should not have now
to lament it. Is not this room rich in specimens of your
landscapes and flowers; and has not Mrs. Darcy felt their rudeness,
and immediately said,--

“This walk is not wide enough for our party. That was the wind-up of the history; that was the glory
of Miss Hawkins. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh. You must contrive to send somebody. You will
say that I am quite an invalid, and go no where, and therefore must
decline their obliging invitation; beginning with my _compliments_, of
course. You can
have no superior, but most true on mine.—She is a complete angel. They had not long finished
their breakfast before Mrs. That she should have walked three miles so early in the day in such
dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. The
Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings, and of the use
to be made of their barouche-landau; and Jane Fairfax was still at her
grandmother’s; and as the return of the Campbells from Ireland was
again delayed, and August, instead of Midsummer, fixed for it, she was
likely to remain there full two months longer, provided at least she
were able to defeat Mrs. This
gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs. It suddenly struck her that it might
be from Lady Catherine, and she anticipated with dismay all the
consequent explanations. Knightley is a gentleman! Yet now I must believe you,” cried
Jane. In what a
disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man! It was as
follows:--

     /* “My dear Sir, */

     “I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation
     in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now
     suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter
     from Hertfordshire. Goddard’s. She had no
scruple with regard to him. This gallant young man, who seemed to love without
feeling, and to recommend himself without complaisance, directly handed
over the word to Miss Fairfax, and with a particular degree of sedate
civility entreated her to study it. Dr. John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea on the
subject, for the first start of its possibility. “That is what you have in your head, I
know—and what you would certainly say if my father were not by.”

“I believe it is very true, my dear, indeed,” said Mr. Weston’s visits here, and given
many little encouragements, and smoothed many little matters, it might
not have come to any thing after all. She saw
in a moment all the possible good. Emma turned round to look
at her in consternation, and hastily said,

“Have you any idea of Mr. So obliged to you
for the carriage last night. Mrs. Mr. and Mrs. It is just what I used to say
to a certain gentleman in company in the days of courtship, when,
because things did not go quite right, did not proceed with all the
rapidity which suited his feelings, he was apt to be in despair, and
exclaim that he was sure at this rate it would be _May_ before Hymen’s
saffron robe would be put on for us. They are very important—and sorry I am that you cannot feel them
sufficiently to act upon them. It was
selfishness which first made him sport with your affections; which
afterwards, when his own were engaged, made him delay the confession of
it, and which finally carried him from Barton. Dashwood, who did not chuse to dine with them oftener
than they dined at the cottage, absolutely refused on her own account;
her daughters might do as they pleased. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy
was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley’s connections
her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from that very wish
which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming
hereafter her own. Take my word for
it, that, if I am alive, I shall be paying a visit at Delaford
Parsonage before Michaelmas; and I am sure I shan’t go if Lucy an’t
there.”

Elinor was quite of her opinion, as to the probability of their not
waiting for any thing more. I never
could have been happy with him, after knowing, as sooner or later I
must have known, all this.—I should have had no confidence, no esteem. beyond anything great! But this I can say, that
if he ever was a beau before he married, he is one still for there is
not the smallest alteration in him.”

“Oh! Neither could
anything be urged against my father, who, though with some
peculiarities, has abilities which Mr. Mr. But I am very
glad to find it was only my own fancy, and that you really do not blame
me. Only give me a carte-blanche.—I am Lady
Patroness, you know. Are you much acquainted with Mr. We shall
enjoy him completely; every thing has turned out exactly as we could
wish.”

There was no resisting such news, no possibility of avoiding the
influence of such a happy face as Mr. Oh, go to him this
moment.”

“How can that be done? I do not mean, however,
to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to
music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. Ferrars and Fanny still more, did not see the
necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion; and Marianne, when
called on for hers, offended them all, by declaring that she had no
opinion to give, as she had never thought about it. People
who have extensive grounds themselves are always pleased with any thing
in the same style.”

Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. But he had given a reason for his interference, which asked no
extraordinary stretch of belief. A great deal too handsome, in my opinion, for
any place _they_ can ever afford to live in. My father bears it better. I
dream of every body at Highbury when I am away—and when I have gone
through my particular friends, then I begin dreaming of Mr. Mrs. “I cannot agree with you. He was recalled from wit to wisdom,
not by any reproof of hers, but by his own sensibility. So I looked at it directly, and, ‘Lord! Knightley startled her, by saying,

“You will not ask me what is the point of envy.—You are determined, I
see, to have no curiosity.—You are wise—but _I_ cannot be wise. Surprizes are foolish things. I declare I can hardly stand. You will
be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him. Weston was in distress
about the supper; and Mr. In the next room is a
new instrument just come down for her--a present from my master: she
comes here to-morrow with him.”

Mr. “She knows her own worth too well for false shame,” replied Edward. Jane met her with a smile of
such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently
marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening. It was natural for him to feel that he had _cause_ to sigh. There he had talked to her friends
when he could not to herself. Elinor, nothing can. Her first communication had reached no farther than to state the fact
of the engagement, and the length of time it had existed.—Marianne’s
feelings had then broken in, and put an end to all regularity of
detail; and for some time all that could be done was to soothe her
distress, lessen her alarms, and combat her resentment. Elton’s
acknowledging herself the inferior in thought, word, or deed; or in her
being under any restraint beyond her own scanty rule of good-breeding. Long does not come back till
the day before; so, it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for
she will not know him herself.”

“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce
Mr. But you are too good for that, I am sure.”

Harriet was standing at one of the windows. I am quite well, I am only distressed by
some dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn.”

She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could
not speak another word. Elizabeth felt Jane’s
pleasure. I shall not discuss it here. “Writing to each other,” said Lucy, returning the letter into her
pocket, “is the only comfort we have in such long separations. Dashwood, and
asked how long they had been in town. A warm climate may be prescribed for
her. She was confident of having performed her duty; and to fret over
unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her
disposition. Elton’s tones again distinctly
forward.—Mr. “Such weather makes every thing and
every body disgusting. Edward! We shall know more about them all, in half an hour, from you,
than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year.”

“Yes, Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and
Mrs. The son, a steady respectable young man, was
amply provided for by the fortune of his mother, which had been large,
and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age. If
they are not put off, he cannot stir. But the effort was painful. It was lower and
quicker than ever! My dear Emma, we must consider this. Her
disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her
sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could
never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as
Bingley had now been gone a week, and nothing was heard of his return. The consequence of this, upon a mind
so young, so lively, so inexperienced as Mrs. A regard for the requester would often make
one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason
one into it. Our part of London is
very superior to most others!—You must not confound us with London in
general, my dear sir. Willoughby could not hear of her marriage without a pang; and his
punishment was soon afterwards complete in the voluntary forgiveness of
Mrs. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world,
and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”

“But you are not entitled to know _mine_; nor will such behaviour as
this ever induce me to be explicit.”

“Let me be rightly understood. Knightley, their own especial set, were the
only persons invited to meet them;—the hours were to be early, as well
as the numbers few; Mr. “Lady Catherine de Bourgh,” she replied, “has very lately given him a
living. Man’s boasted power and freedom, all are flown;
Lord of the earth and sea, he bends a slave,
    And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone. Her affection for me deserved better
treatment, and I often, with great self-reproach, recall the tenderness
which, for a very short time, had the power of creating any return. Her eyes, a deep grey, with dark eye-lashes and
eyebrows, had never been denied their praise; but the skin, which she
had been used to cavil at, as wanting colour, had a clearness and
delicacy which really needed no fuller bloom. No; not less when I knew
you to be unhappy, than when I had believed you at ease, did I turn
away from every exertion of duty or friendship; scarcely allowing
sorrow to exist but with me, regretting only _that_ heart which had
deserted and wronged me, and leaving you, for whom I professed an
unbounded affection, to be miserable for my sake.”

Here ceased the rapid flow of her self-reproving spirit; and Elinor,
impatient to soothe, though too honest to flatter, gave her instantly
that praise and support which her frankness and her contrition so well
deserved. If it was not for the drawback of
her illness—but I am afraid we must expect to see her grown thin, and
looking very poorly. Simpson, you know, and yet if you do but meet him of a morning,
he is not fit to be seen. Dashwood, like her daughter, heard Willoughby’s story from
himself—had she witnessed his distress, and been under the influence of
his countenance and his manner, it is probable that her compassion
would have been greater. Smith—and if that is the case, it must be
highly expedient for Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at
present. We live in so different a part of
town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go
out so little, that it is very improbable they should meet at all,
unless he really comes to see her.”

“And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his
friend, and Mr. He cannot want
money—he cannot want leisure. “I thought it my duty,” said he, “independent of my feelings, to give
her the option of continuing the engagement or not, when I was
renounced by my mother, and stood to all appearance without a friend in
the world to assist me. I am most seriously displeased.”

Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her
Ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. Willoughby of Combe Magna. Four weeks were to pass away
before her uncle and aunt’s arrival. Weston, who
were standing to speak to her. You will not find
him more favourably spoken of by anyone.”

“I cannot pretend to be sorry,” said Wickham, after a short
interruption, “that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond
their deserts; but with _him_ I believe it does not often happen. It is tenderness of heart which makes my dear father so generally
beloved—which gives Isabella all her popularity.—I have it not—but I
know how to prize and respect it.—Harriet is my superior in all the
charm and all the felicity it gives. And poor Mr. I dare say you have seen
enough of Edward to know that he would prefer the church to every other
profession; now my plan is that he should take orders as soon as he
can, and then through your interest, which I am sure you would be kind
enough to use out of friendship for him, and I hope out of some regard
to me, your brother might be persuaded to give him Norland living;
which I understand is a very good one, and the present incumbent not
likely to live a great while. But he found Lydia
     absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. Woodhouse uncomfortable, and be an excuse for his
hurrying away. “My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so
much?” said her aunt. Elton, even in the days of his favour, none had disturbed her more than
his propensity to dine with Mr. This was very kind of you to
be persuaded to come. The day approached,
the day arrived; and after a morning of some anxious watching, Frank
Churchill, in all the certainty of his own self, reached Randalls
before dinner, and every thing was safe. So much the better. Will you not shake hands with me?”

He could not then avoid it, but her touch seemed painful to him, and he
held her hand only for a moment. I do not like crooked, twisted,
blasted trees. But their
father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really
glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. Bingley; “but I am
sure it will be too much for Kitty. These are the motives which I have been pressing on you. Miss
Smith, the step at the turning.”




CHAPTER X


The appearance of the little sitting-room as they entered, was
tranquillity itself; Mrs. The loo table, however, did not appear. On being made acquainted with the
present Mr. She will probably have soon done, and then we shall go home. Disputable, however,
as might be the taste of such a termination, it was in itself a
charming walk, and the view which closed it extremely pretty.—The
considerable slope, at nearly the foot of which the Abbey stood,
gradually acquired a steeper form beyond its grounds; and at half a
mile distant was a bank of considerable abruptness and grandeur, well
clothed with wood;—and at the bottom of this bank, favourably placed
and sheltered, rose the Abbey Mill Farm, with meadows in front, and the
river making a close and handsome curve around it. I am extremely happy. He was quite as undaunted and as lively as ever; and, after
seeing him, Emma thus moralised to herself:—

“I do not know whether it ought to be so, but certainly silly things do
cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an impudent
way. “If it were merely a fine house
richly furnished,” said she, “I should not care about it myself; but the
grounds are delightful. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond
of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. The pity of
such a woman as Lady Middleton! I ran away from you all as soon as I could; but not
before I had seen Marianne’s sweet face as white as death. In
truth, I must acknowledge, that, with all the disadvantages of this
humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of
compassion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at Rosings.”

Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was
obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility
and truth in a few short sentences. Poverty
certainly has not contracted her mind: I really believe, if she had
only a shilling in the world, she would be very likely to give away
sixpence of it; and nobody is afraid of her: that is a great charm.”

“Dear me! Upon the whole, Emma left her with such softened, charitable feelings,
as made her look around in walking home, and lament that Highbury
afforded no young man worthy of giving her independence; nobody that
she could wish to scheme about for her. She had not even a share in his opening compliments.—Her name was not
mentioned;—and there was so striking a change in all this, and such an
ill-judged solemnity of leave-taking in his graceful acknowledgments,
as she thought, at first, could not escape her father’s suspicion. Philips a very attentive
listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she
heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as
soon as she could. Marianne herself had seen less of his person than the
rest, for the confusion which crimsoned over her face, on his lifting
her up, had robbed her of the power of regarding him after their
entering the house. Willoughby, “poor Willoughby,” as she now allowed herself to
call him, was constantly in her thoughts; she would not but have heard
his vindication for the world, and now blamed, now acquitted herself
for having judged him so harshly before. “This will not do,” said Elizabeth; “you never will be able to make both
of them good for anything. She had reason
to believe her nearly recovered from her cold, and it was desirable
that she should have as much time as possible for getting the better of
her other complaint before the gentleman’s return. But I can
remember nothing;—not even that particular riddle which you have heard
me mention; I can only recollect the first stanza; and there are
several. Even Lady Middleton took the trouble of being
delighted, which was putting herself rather out of her way; and as for
the Miss Steeles, especially Lucy, they had never been so happy in
their lives as this intelligence made them. Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above
mentioned; and while Mr. The shock which her marriage had
given me,” he continued, in a voice of great agitation, “was of
trifling weight—was nothing to what I felt when I heard, about two
years afterwards, of her divorce. I roused and
interested you, because I was so unlike _them_. Elizabeth’s collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and
as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to
Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able
to speak any more. Elton’s best compliments, “that he was proposing to leave Highbury
the following morning in his way to Bath; where, in compliance with the
pressing entreaties of some friends, he had engaged to spend a few
weeks, and very much regretted the impossibility he was under, from
various circumstances of weather and business, of taking a personal
leave of Mr. Her joy and expression of regard long outlived her wonder. I speak as a friend, Emma. I do not scruple to say that she plays extremely
well. You know I have. My peace of mind is doubly involved in it; for not only is it
horrible to suspect a person, who has been what _he_ has been to _me_,
of such designs, but what must it make me appear to myself? I observed him narrowly, and am convinced of it. Darcy. Nobody can
be more devoted to home than I am. Knightley must take his seat with the rest round
the large modern circular table which Emma had introduced at Hartfield,
and which none but Emma could have had power to place there and
persuade her father to use, instead of the small-sized Pembroke, on
which two of his daily meals had, for forty years been crowded. “And what are we to do for a proper partner for her?” said Mr. She followed her father to the fireplace, and they both sat down. “Do you dare to suppose me
so great a blockhead, as not to know what a man is talking of?—What do
you deserve?”

“Oh! Bingley and Jane?” was a wonder which
introduced the discussion of _their_ affairs. Your
resolution, or rather your expectation of never marrying, results from
an idea that the person whom you might prefer, would be too greatly
your superior in situation to think of you. To avoid a comparative poverty, which her affection
and her society would have deprived of all its horrors, I have, by
raising myself to affluence, lost every thing that could make it a
blessing.”

“You did then,” said Elinor, a little softened, “believe yourself at
one time attached to her?”

“To have resisted such attractions, to have withstood such tenderness! Ferrars myself, ma’am, this morning in Exeter, and his lady
too, Miss Steele as was. Ferrars, I believe, is entirely dependent on his mother.”

“He has only two thousand pounds of his own; it would be madness to
marry upon that, though for my own part, I could give up every prospect
of more without a sigh. My friend Robert
could not resist. Mrs. Collins and Lizzy. They contained a noble piece
of water; a sail on which was to form a great part of the morning’s
amusement; cold provisions were to be taken, open carriages only to be
employed, and every thing conducted in the usual style of a complete
party of pleasure. It was his business, however, to say that he
_did_, and he said it very prettily. I
had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must
so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly
foolish.”

“My dear Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other
gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river; and had left him
only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to
Georgiana that morning. With the mention of Derbyshire, there were many ideas connected. I cannot blame myself for
having done thus much. Weston, smiling, “what is the certainty of
caprice?” Then turning to Isabella, who had not been attending
before—“You must know, my dear Mrs. This had happened the year before. Her mind was quite sick of Mr. Knightley shew them the
gardens—all the gardens?—She wished to see the whole extent.”—The
pertinacity of her friend seemed more than she could bear. But for this strange kind of secrecy maintained by them
relative to their engagement, which in fact concealed nothing at all,
she could not account; and it was so wholly contradictory to their
general opinions and practice, that a doubt sometimes entered her mind
of their being really engaged, and this doubt was enough to prevent her
making any inquiry of Marianne. I could not have stood it. _I_ talked about the
dance, and _you_ ought to make some kind of remark on the size of the
room, or the number of couples.”

He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be
said. It is not that I am without the wish;
but you know how impossible my father would deem it that James should
put-to for such a purpose.”

“Quite out of the question, quite out of the question,” he
replied;—“but you must often wish it, I am sure.” And he smiled with
such seeming pleasure at the conviction, that she must proceed another
step. Mary, however, continued to console herself with such
kind of moral extractions from the evil before them. Her parting look was
grateful—and her parting words, “Oh! She was, in fact, beginning very
much to wonder that she had ever thought him pleasing at all; and his
sight was so inseparably connected with some very disagreeable
feelings, that, except in a moral light, as a penance, a lesson, a
source of profitable humiliation to her own mind, she would have been
thankful to be assured of never seeing him again. Ferrars, I think it ought
not to be mentioned to any body else. But though Bingley and Jane
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and as they
always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that
every moment should be employed in conversing together. Dixon!”

“But, in spite of all her friends’ urgency, and her own wish of seeing
Ireland, Miss Fairfax prefers devoting the time to you and Mrs. “I must not dwell upon it,” said she.—“I must not think of it. Darcy, by the
feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but
a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to
regret that he came. But at length she was secured by the
exertions of Elinor, who greatly disapproved such continual seclusion. Willoughby very soon.”

“You have said so,” replied Elinor, “almost every day since they first
met on High-church Down; and they had not known each other a week, I
believe, before you were certain that Marianne wore his picture round
her neck; but it turned out to be only the miniature of our great
uncle.”

“But indeed this is quite another thing. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to
supper; but their carriage was, unluckily, ordered before any of the
others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them. Goddard’s.”

Voices approached the shop—or rather one voice and two ladies: Mrs. I _can_ talk of it now, I hope, as I ought to
do.”

Elinor tenderly invited her to be open. Mr. But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that
cheerfulness which had been used to characterize her style, and which,
proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself, and kindly
disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. The whole family in short were properly overjoyed on the
occasion. Mrs. Then, here come all my
attempts at three of those four children;—there they are, Henry and
John and Bella, from one end of the sheet to the other, and any one of
them might do for any one of the rest. “Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty she
wanted,”—observed Mrs. “Happy with a man of libertine
practices!—With one who so injured the peace of the dearest of our
friends, and the best of men!—No—my Marianne has not a heart to be made
happy with such a man!—Her conscience, her sensitive conscience, would
have felt all that the conscience of her husband ought to have felt.”

Marianne sighed, and repeated, “I wish for no change.”

“You consider the matter,” said Elinor, “exactly as a good mind and a
sound understanding must consider it; and I dare say you perceive, as
well as myself, not only in this, but in many other circumstances,
reason enough to be convinced that your marriage must have involved you
in many certain troubles and disappointments, in which you would have
been poorly supported by an affection, on his side, much less certain. You could not make _me_
happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who
would make _you_ so. She was not a woman of
many words; for, unlike people in general, she proportioned them to the
number of her ideas; and of the few syllables that did escape her, not
one fell to the share of Miss Dashwood, whom she eyed with the spirited
determination of disliking her at all events. I shall speak to Mr. If you, my dear
father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and
of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of
her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. The motive was too common to be
wondered at; but the means, however they might succeed by establishing
his superiority in ill-breeding, were not likely to attach any one to
him except his wife. Darcy’s house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of
the latter with regard to new furniture. Very
well; I shall not attempt to deny Emma’s being pretty.”

“Pretty! And how came he not to have settled that matter before this
person’s death? Wickham
frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of
balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a
good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say
that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much
delight as the rattle of the chaise. we had such a good piece
of fun the other day at Colonel Forster’s! His was an involuntary confidence, an irrepressible
effusion to a soothing friend, not an application to a parent. nothing seems to
do her any good. She wondered, with
little intermission what could be the reason of it; was sure there must
be some bad news, and thought over every kind of distress that could
have befallen him, with a fixed determination that he should not escape
them all. No, Kitty, I have at least learnt to be cautious, and
you will feel the effects of it. I was sitting near the
door—Elizabeth saw me directly; but he did not; he was busy with the
umbrella. They were within twenty yards of each other; and so abrupt was his
appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. “Who is Colonel Brandon? It is on her
account that attention to Randalls is doubly due, and she must doubly
feel the omission. The business of her life was to get her
daughters married: its solace was visiting and news. I have a very
strong notion that it comes from him. Bennet, who assured
him, with some asperity, that they were very well able to keep a good
cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. Well! what can be the meaning of it! Edward seemed
a second Willoughby; and acknowledging as Elinor did, that she _had_
loved him most sincerely, could she feel less than herself! Younge was of course removed from her charge. “I have not the smallest objection to explaining them,” said he, as soon
as she allowed him to speak. She would not
even wish for any renewal of his attentions. Mr. Mrs. “We are never safe
from _him_.”

“He will not come in, as Mrs. As for Lucy
Steele, she considered her so totally unamiable, so absolutely
incapable of attaching a sensible man, that she could not be persuaded
at first to believe, and afterwards to pardon, any former affection of
Edward for her. Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured,
with unwearying civility, that they were perfectly needless. Frank
Churchill has written to Mrs. We were
very wrong before; we will be cautious now.—He is your superior, no
doubt, and there do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious
nature; but yet, Harriet, more wonderful things have taken place, there
have been matches of greater disparity. He had reached Randalls the evening before. Referring the education to her seemed to imply it. “I think, Edward,” said Mrs. She could not determine how her mother
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur
would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man; but whether she
were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it
was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to
her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Long does not keep a carriage, and had to come
to the ball in a hack chaise.”

“I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Mrs. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a
fortnight. I declare, after all, there is no
enjoyment like reading! And the dried cherries too! Dashwood, gave additional pain to them all in the parting, which
shortly took place, and left an uncomfortable impression on Elinor’s
feelings especially, which required some trouble and time to subdue. When they had all talked a little while in harmony
of the weather and Mrs. But take it away, and all _appropriation_ ceases, and a
very pretty gallant charade remains, fit for any collection. “I do not ask whether you are musical, Mrs. To the left is Barton park, amongst those woods and
plantations. “I cannot make him out. Collins has
made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him.”

[Illustration:

     “they entered the breakfast room”
]

Charlotte had hardly time to answer before they were joined by Kitty,
who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the
breakfast-room, where Mrs. I was never more annoyed! With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. She was _now_
struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and
wondered it had escaped her before. Serle understands boiling an egg
better than any body. “You _must_ drink tea with us to night,” said he, “for we shall be
quite alone—and tomorrow you must absolutely dine with us, for we shall
be a large party.”

Mrs. yet when I thought of her to-day
as really dying, it was a kind of comfort to me to imagine that I knew
exactly how she would appear to those, who saw her last in this world. The unpersuadable point, which he did not mention, Emma guessed to be
good behaviour to his father. Leave shame to her. Could
not have imagined it.—So well lighted up!—Jane, Jane, look!—did you
ever see any thing? Unaccountable, however, as the circumstances of his release might
appear to the whole family, it was certain that Edward was free; and to
what purpose that freedom would be employed was easily pre-determined
by all;—for after experiencing the blessings of _one_ imprudent
engagement, contracted without his mother’s consent, as he had already
done for more than four years, nothing less could be expected of him in
the failure of _that_, than the immediate contraction of another. Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to them all, than
Willoughby’s behaviour. “It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married,”
continued her mother; “but at the same time, Mr. Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in
attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. Knightley, to be dependent on _your_
recommendation, had I quitted Mr. However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his
first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds
of the surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful
property of some one or other of their daughters. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that
her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident been
lost. Before the housemaid had lit their fire the next day, or the sun gained
any power over a cold, gloomy morning in January, Marianne, only half
dressed, was kneeling against one of the window-seats for the sake of
all the little light she could command from it, and writing as fast as
a continual flow of tears would permit her. Her Ladyship received them
civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so
acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact,
almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,
much more than to any other person in the room. It would be the greatest pleasure to them,
if you could allow me to attend you there. ‘Oh!’ said I, ‘I shall not
forestall Jane; I left her dancing with Mr. The necessity must
be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd. poor fellow!—sad business for him.”—She was
extremely concerned; for, though very eccentric, he had a thousand good
qualities.—How could he be so taken in?—Did not think him at all in
love—not in the least.—Poor Knightley!—There would be an end of all
pleasant intercourse with him.—How happy he had been to come and dine
with them whenever they asked him! It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for
Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. My father was not only fond of this
young man’s society, whose manners were always engaging, he had also the
highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be his profession,
intended to provide for him in it. He was dining with the Randalls family, and
Jane, at the Eltons’; and he had seen a look, more than a single look,
at Miss Fairfax, which, from the admirer of Miss Woodhouse, seemed
somewhat out of place. Jennings; the length of which,
though never exactly fixed, had been expected by all to comprise at
least five or six weeks. Weston, must necessarily open the
cause; but when these effusions were put by, they had talked a good
deal of the present and of the future state of the engagement. She managed the recital, as she hoped, with address; prepared her
anxious listener with caution; related simply and honestly the chief
points on which Willoughby grounded his apology; did justice to his
repentance, and softened only his protestations of present regard. Oh,
why is not everybody as happy?”

Elizabeth’s congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth, a
delight, which words could but poorly express. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XXV. He was to
leave them early the next day; and he soon began with—

“Well, Emma, I do not believe I have any thing more to say about the
boys; but you have your sister’s letter, and every thing is down at
full length there we may be sure. You would not have been so long in
coming, if you had had a pleasant idea of Highbury.”

He laughed rather consciously; and though denying the sentiment, Emma
was convinced that it had been so. She and Mrs. Though _we_ have not known him long, he is no stranger in
this part of the world; and who has ever spoken to his disadvantage? Mine is a misery which nothing
can do away.”

“You must not talk so, Marianne. Your sister I also watched. ‘Lord!’ says I, ‘is Mrs. Elizabeth received
them with all the forbearance of civility; and at the request of the
gentlemen remained at the instrument till her Ladyship’s carriage was
ready to take them all home. Mrs. he has been dead these
eight years and better. The Frank Churchill so long talked of, so high in interest, was
actually before her—he was presented to her, and she did not think too
much had been said in his praise; he was a _very_ good looking young
man; height, air, address, all were unexceptionable, and his
countenance had a great deal of the spirit and liveliness of his
father’s; he looked quick and sensible. I do not consider myself at all a fortunate
person.”

“You are not quite so miserable, though, as when you first came. Marianne was quite angry
with her for doubting it. The room they
were taken into was the one he chiefly occupied, and looking forwards;
behind it was another with which it immediately communicated; the door
between them was open, and Emma passed into it with the housekeeper to
receive her assistance in the most comfortable manner. Balls will be absolutely
prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters. It will be as
clean as Randalls by candlelight. When Mrs. FINIS

The family of Dashwood had long been settled in Sussex. She was good
enough for Mr. Dear Miss Woodhouse, do advise me.”

“Oh no, no! “You had better leave me,” was all the notice that her sister received
from her. Was it new for one,
perhaps too busy to seek, to be the prize of a girl who would seek
him?—Was it new for any thing in this world to be unequal,
inconsistent, incongruous—or for chance and circumstance (as second
causes) to direct the human fate? I would not disappoint the little angel
for all the world: and if you want me at the card-table now, I am
resolved to finish the basket after supper.”

“You are very good, I hope it won’t hurt your eyes—will you ring the
bell for some working candles? And what can he mean by
apologizing for being next in the entail? “Have you been lately in Sussex?” said Elinor. I assure you
they are very genteel people. We shall
soon overtake her. “Very pretty, sir, upon my word; to send me on here, to be an
encumbrance to my friends, so long before you vouchsafe to come!—But
you knew what a dutiful creature you had to deal with. Gardiner and
her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her. Elizabeth particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter the
preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, was
hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill
applied. [Illustration]




CHAPTER XVI. _You_ wish to think all the
world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. Collins,” she added, “that Lizzy shall be
brought to reason. Jennings received the
information with a great deal of joy, and many assurances of kindness
and care; nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her. Poor
Edward! you were perfectly right! This invaluable friend was a
very young woman, and very lately married. Miss Bingley was
engrossed by Mr. My interference was quite
as likely to do harm as good. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you
pleasure.”

“I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. “But depend upon it, Mr. John Knightley too well—I am
very sure he understands the value of friendship as well as any body. Bates good
morning.”

And not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded. But I must be more in want of a friend, or an
agreeable companion, than I have yet been, to take the trouble of
conquering any body’s reserve to procure one. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to
you and her mother.--Yours, etc. It was by no means her object to have it believed that her sister was
_not_ a fine lady; perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretence of
it;—and she was considering in what way she had best retract, when Mr. They went to the library,
therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to make
it known to her. Wickham, and rejoiced in
it. But now it was all too natural. Continual engagements at home and abroad, however,
supplied all the deficiencies of nature and education; supported the
good spirits of Sir John, and gave exercise to the good breeding of his
wife. And on the gentlemen’s approaching, one of
the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper,--

“The men shan’t come and part us, I am determined. A private dance, without sitting down to supper, was
pronounced an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women; and Mrs. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I am not
afraid of requesting it, though I have still something more to ask of
the former. I wish
I may not sink into ‘poor Emma’ with him at once.—His tender compassion
towards oppressed worth can go no farther.”

“Ah!” he cried, “I wish your father might be half as easily convinced
as John will be, of our having every right that equal worth can give,
to be happy together. However, as they are so very desirous to have dear Emma dine
with them, and as you will both be there, and Mr. He heard her attentively, and then said,--

“Lydia will never be easy till she has exposed herself in some public
place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little
expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present
circumstances.”

“If you were aware,” said Elizabeth, “of the very great disadvantage to
us all, which must arise from the public notice of Lydia’s unguarded and
imprudent manner, nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you
would judge differently in the affair.”

“Already arisen!” repeated Mr. Her many
beginnings were displayed. The
setting always casts a different shade on it, you know.”

Elinor had met his eye, and looked conscious likewise. Mr. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just
enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting
about pretty much. Do
you draw?”

“No, not at all.”

“What, none of you?”

“Not one.”

“That is very strange. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;
coaxed and threatened her by turns. If I could persuade myself that my manners were perfectly easy
and graceful, I should not be shy.”

“But you would still be reserved,” said Marianne, “and that is worse.”

Edward started—“Reserved! You may possibly wonder why all this was not
told you last night. I compare it with what it ought to have been; I compare it with
yours.”

“Our situations have borne little resemblance.”

“They have borne more than our conduct. Bennet was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and by the middle
of June Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton
without tears,--an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth
hope, that by the following Christmas she might be so tolerably
reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by
some cruel and malicious arrangement at the War Office, another regiment
should be quartered in Meryton. no, no, no—how can you suspect me of such a thing? Consider Mr. She was his object, and every body must perceive it. I am sure if I had had a notion of it, I would
not have joked her about it for all my money. Darcy’s steward, and of _that_, I can
assure you, he informed me himself.”

“I beg your pardon,” replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer. Jennings, they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the
party. She seemed
bent on giving no real insight into Mr. Oh, Bromley, of course. I was told, that not only your
sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that
_you_--that Miss Elizabeth Bennet would, in all likelihood, be soon
afterwards united to my nephew--my own nephew, Mr. Reynolds
replied, that he was; adding, “But we expect him to-morrow, with a large
party of friends.” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had
not by any circumstance been delayed a day! If we _can_ but put
Willoughby out of her head!”

“Ay, if we can do _that_, Ma’am,” said Elinor, “we shall do very well
with or without Colonel Brandon.” And then rising, she went away to
join Marianne, whom she found, as she expected, in her own room,
leaning, in silent misery, over the small remains of a fire, which,
till Elinor’s entrance, had been her only light. John Knightley had really a great regard for his father-in-law, and
generally a strong sense of what was due to him; but it was too often
for Emma’s charity, especially as there was all the pain of
apprehension frequently to be endured, though the offence came not. And your mother has brought on herself a most
appropriate punishment. “It seems like madness! A pint of porter with my cold
beef at Marlborough was enough to over-set me.”

“At Marlborough!”—cried Elinor, more and more at a loss to understand
what he would be at. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how
much he will give her. Wickham is safe.”

“And Mary King is safe!” added Elizabeth; “safe from a connection
imprudent as to fortune.”

“She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him.”

“But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side,” said Jane. The
superior degree of confidence towards Harriet, which this one article
marked, gave her severe pain. No letter from Willoughby came; and none seemed expected by Marianne. As for Mary, she was
mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance
of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table,--

“This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of. The time of year lightened the evil to him. How can Mr. But, really, I know not what to say. Good old Mrs. Oh! When first sounded on the subject, he was so miserable, that they were
almost hopeless.—A second allusion, indeed, gave less pain.—He began to
think it was to be, and that he could not prevent it—a very promising
step of the mind on its way to resignation. Martin, or to be suspected of
it.”

When Harriet had closed her evidence, she appealed to her dear Miss
Woodhouse, to say whether she had not good ground for hope. “There is my news:—I thought it would interest you,” said Mr. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as
Jane had written the direction remarkably ill. She read over her aunt’s commendation of him again and
again. Harriet was very ready to
speak of the share he had had in their moonlight walks and merry
evening games; and dwelt a good deal upon his being so very
good-humoured and obliging. “No, I cannot go to
Cleveland.”

“You forget,” said Elinor gently, “that its situation is not—that it is
not in the neighbourhood of—”

“But it is in Somersetshire.—I cannot go into Somersetshire.—There,
where I looked forward to going...No, Elinor, you cannot expect me to
go there.”

Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of overcoming such
feelings;—she only endeavoured to counteract them by working on
others;—represented it, therefore, as a measure which would fix the
time of her returning to that dear mother, whom she so much wished to
see, in a more eligible, more comfortable manner, than any other plan
could do, and perhaps without any greater delay. Now,
however, it was absolutely to be; every preparation was resumed, and
very soon after the Churchills had removed to Richmond, a few lines
from Frank, to say that his aunt felt already much better for the
change, and that he had no doubt of being able to join them for
twenty-four hours at any given time, induced them to name as early a
day as possible. Elton was certainly
cheering; but still, after a time, she was tender-hearted again towards
the rejected Mr. Knightley, why do not you stay at home like poor Mr. Elinor answered in some distress that she was, and then talked of
head-aches, low spirits, and over fatigues; and of every thing to which
she could decently attribute her sister’s behaviour. What has Mr. no—far from it—certainly plain. To attach myself to your sister, therefore, was not a
thing to be thought of; and with a meanness, selfishness, cruelty,
which no indignant, no contemptuous look, even of yours, Miss Dashwood,
can ever reprobate too much,—I was acting in this manner, trying to
engage her regard, without a thought of returning it. Part of every winter she
had been used to spend in Bath; but Bristol was her home, the very
heart of Bristol; for though the father and mother had died some years
ago, an uncle remained—in the law line—nothing more distinctly
honourable was hazarded of him, than that he was in the law line; and
with him the daughter had lived. Console Lady Catherine as well as
     you can. And to propose that she and I should unite to
form a musical club! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.”

“It is amazing to me,” said Bingley, “how young ladies can have patience
to be so very accomplished as they all are.”

“All young ladies accomplished! “So extremely like Maple Grove! ‘La!’ I shall say
directly, ‘I wonder how you could think of such a thing? It would be a great disappointment to Mr. Mr. “Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual: I thought it would never
be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand that my uncle and aunt
were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said,--

“I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books
of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. I cannot do justice to his kindness. There was too much to
be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. Knightley must
not marry!—You would not have little Henry cut out from Donwell?—Oh! Then, remembering Colonel Brandon,
reproved herself, felt that to _his_ sufferings and _his_ constancy far
more than to his rival’s, the reward of her sister was due, and wished
any thing rather than Mrs. The landed property of Hartfield certainly was
inconsiderable, being but a sort of notch in the Donwell Abbey estate,
to which all the rest of Highbury belonged; but their fortune, from
other sources, was such as to make them scarcely secondary to Donwell
Abbey itself, in every other kind of consequence; and the Woodhouses
had long held a high place in the consideration of the neighbourhood
which Mr. There is my sister; and really quite her own little elegant figure!—and
the face not unlike. But in the
interim—in the interim of the very few hours that were to pass, before
I could have an opportunity of speaking with her in private—a
circumstance occurred—an unlucky circumstance, to ruin all my
resolution, and with it all my comfort. It was painful to him even to
keep a third cousin to himself. It is a retired place. Frank Churchill might have—I do not mean
to say that he did not dream it—I am sure I have sometimes the oddest
dreams in the world—but if I am questioned about it, I must acknowledge
that there was such an idea last spring; for Mrs. His
understanding was good, and his education had given it solid
improvement. Is there nothing one can get to comfort her? She is a
flatterer in all her ways; and so much the worse, because undesigned. There cannot be two opinions about _him_. Wickham will soon be gone; and, therefore, it will not signify to
anybody here what he really is. and as she could not even wish him
successful, she heartily wished him indifferent. We never heard of such things at Maple Grove.”

“Your parish there was small,” said Jane. I doubt whether
he will return the compliment, and discover her to be a lady. I saw
a vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove. The appearance of the servants looking out for them to
give notice of the carriages was a joyful sight; and even the bustle of
collecting and preparing to depart, and the solicitude of Mrs. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker
than a reader, was extremely well pleased to close his large book, and
go. Ferrars’s general behaviour to her sister, seemed, to her, to foretell
such difficulties and distresses to Elinor, as her own wounded heart
taught her to think of with horror; and urged by a strong impulse of
affectionate sensibility, she moved after a moment, to her sister’s
chair, and putting one arm round her neck, and one cheek close to hers,
said in a low, but eager, voice,

“Dear, dear Elinor, don’t mind them. Marianne had been two or three days at home, before the weather was
fine enough for an invalid like herself to venture out. Bennet was not of a
disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own
imprudence had brought on in any of those pleasures which too often
console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. I have no reason to think
ill of her—not the least—except that such extreme and perpetual
cautiousness of word and manner, such a dread of giving a distinct idea
about any body, is apt to suggest suspicions of there being something
to conceal.”

He perfectly agreed with her: and after walking together so long, and
thinking so much alike, Emma felt herself so well acquainted with him,
that she could hardly believe it to be only their second meeting. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her
charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess; and that the most
elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by
her. Harriet Smith was the natural daughter of somebody. was safely delivered of a
son and heir; a very interesting and satisfactory paragraph, at least
to all those intimate connections who knew it before. My regard for Hartfield is most warm”—

He stopt again, rose again, and seemed quite embarrassed.—He was more
in love with her than Emma had supposed; and who can say how it might
have ended, if his father had not made his appearance? [Illustration]

The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Gardiner were half a quarter of a
mile behind. This living of Colonel Brandon’s—can it be true?—has he
really given it to Edward?—I heard it yesterday by chance, and was
coming to you on purpose to enquire farther about it.”

“It is perfectly true.—Colonel Brandon has given the living of Delaford
to Edward.”

“Really!—Well, this is very astonishing!—no relationship!—no connection
between them!—and now that livings fetch such a price!—what was the
value of this?”

“About two hundred a year.”

“Very well—and for the next presentation to a living of that
value—supposing the late incumbent to have been old and sickly, and
likely to vacate it soon—he might have got I dare say—fourteen hundred
pounds. I must get rid of every thing.—There it goes,
and there is an end, thank Heaven! “I assure
you, I feel it exceedingly,” said Lady Catherine; “I believe nobody
feels the loss of friends so much as I do. Her own conduct, as well as her own heart, was before her in the same
few minutes. After an interval of some
minutes, however, he began with,

“I shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this autumn,
instead of coming here.”

“But why should you be sorry, sir?—I assure you, it did the children a
great deal of good.”

“And, moreover, if you must go to the sea, it had better not have been
to South End. Perhaps he thought her too young. The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on the occasion was a
happy relief to Elinor’s spirits, oppressed as they often were by the
clamorous kindness of the others. Weston’s faithful
pupil did not forget either at ten, or eleven, or twelve o’clock, that
she was to think of her at four. What a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when
he put his letter into her hand! But I should
have thought her hair had been darker.”

Marianne spoke inconsiderately what she really felt—but when she saw
how much she had pained Edward, her own vexation at her want of thought
could not be surpassed by his. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great
delight. It is not to be supposed that any prior attachment on your
side—in short, you know as to an attachment of that kind, it is quite
out of the question, the objections are insurmountable—you have too
much sense not to see all that. Mr. [Illustration]

Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as
soon as she possibly could. I shall not sport with your impatience by reading what he says
on that point. Martin, but to talk of Mr. [Illustration]

The discussion of Mr. I suppose your brother was quite a beau, Miss
Dashwood, before he married, as he was so rich?”

“Upon my word,” replied Elinor, “I cannot tell you, for I do not
perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word. Smith, was to set me free; yet
that event being uncertain, and possibly far distant, it had been for
some time my intention to re-establish my circumstances by marrying a
woman of fortune. In the meanwhile the lame horse recovered so fast, that the party to
Box Hill was again under happy consideration; and at last Donwell was
settled for one day, and Box Hill for the next,—the weather appearing
exactly right. Philips
visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a source of felicity
unknown before. “I had only my own
family to study from. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had
been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. He had a comfortable home for her, and Emma imagined a very sufficient
income; for though the vicarage of Highbury was not large, he was known
to have some independent property; and she thought very highly of him
as a good-humoured, well-meaning, respectable young man, without any
deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world. The advantage of the match I felt to be all on
her side; and had not the smallest doubt (nor have I now) that there
would be a general cry-out upon her extreme good luck. His sisters were very anxious for his having an estate of his own; but
though he was now established only as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no
means unwilling to preside at his table; nor was Mrs. A superior
performer!—very far from it, I assure you. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of
their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. She loved the child, and had always kept it with her. She remembered, also, that till the Netherfield
family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but
herself; but that after their removal, it had been everywhere discussed;
that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. The result of this distress was, that, with a much more voluntary,
cheerful consent than his daughter had ever presumed to hope for at the
moment, she was able to fix her wedding-day—and Mr. “Did you?” replied Elinor. But,
however, I hope you will think better of it. To amuse her, and be agreeable in her eyes, seemed all that he
cared for—and Emma, glad to be enlivened, not sorry to be flattered,
was gay and easy too, and gave him all the friendly encouragement, the
admission to be gallant, which she had ever given in the first and most
animating period of their acquaintance; but which now, in her own
estimation, meant nothing, though in the judgment of most people
looking on it must have had such an appearance as no English word but
flirtation could very well describe. There was nothing like flirtation between her and
her partner. Martin would ever marry any body
but what had had some education—and been very well brought up. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him
myself; how can you be so teasing?”

“I honour your circumspection. Suckling, a lady known at Maple Grove. Her
youth had passed without distinction, and her middle of life was
devoted to the care of a failing mother, and the endeavour to make a
small income go as far as possible. She had given them
neither men, nor names, nor places, that could raise a blush. It was not the
gipsies—it was not Mr. I have suspected it some time, but
I am now convinced.”

Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect
indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and
her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the
next morning to London. To provide for her otherwise was out of
Colonel Campbell’s power; for though his income, by pay and
appointments, was handsome, his fortune was moderate and must be all
his daughter’s; but, by giving her an education, he hoped to be
supplying the means of respectable subsistence hereafter. It is a great comfort to have you
     so rich; and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will
     think of us. Ferrars to his choice, and
re-established him completely in her favour. Dashwood did
not seem to know much about horses, he soon set him down as a very
good-natured fellow: while Lady Middleton saw enough of fashion in his
appearance to think his acquaintance worth having; and Mr. The information
was, as you state, that he was going to be married to a Miss Hawkins. From that evening, or at
least from the time of Miss Woodhouse’s encouraging her to think of
him, Harriet had begun to be sensible of his talking to her much more
than he had been used to do, and of his having indeed quite a different
manner towards her; a manner of kindness and sweetness!—Latterly she
had been more and more aware of it. Darcy had considerable patronage
in the church, and his cousin could have none at all. Poor soul! Palmer?”

Mr. Woman’s
usual occupations of hand and mind will be as open to me then as they
are now; or with no important variation. Sir John and Lady
Middleton wished it very much. Woodhouse considered eight persons at dinner together as the
utmost that his nerves could bear—and here would be a ninth—and Emma
apprehended that it would be a ninth very much out of humour at not
being able to come even to Hartfield for forty-eight hours without
falling in with a dinner-party. You will laugh at my warmth—but, upon my word,
I talk of nothing but Jane Fairfax.—And her situation is so calculated
to affect one!—Miss Woodhouse, we must exert ourselves and endeavour to
do something for her. Jennings rather disappointed. After a little more
discourse in praise of gruel, with some wondering at its not being
taken every evening by every body, he proceeded to say, with an air of
grave reflection,

“It was an awkward business, my dear, your spending the autumn at South
End instead of coming here. “They
will join me early to-morrow,” he continued, “and among them are some
who will claim an acquaintance with you,--Mr. By a former marriage, Mr. Mr. But what was your mother? She might have
prevented the indulgence and increase of such sentiments. “A very fine young man indeed, Mr. A glass of wine, which Elinor procured for her directly,
made her more comfortable, and she was at last able to express some
sense of her kindness, by saying,

“Poor Elinor! To take a dislike to a young man, only because he appeared to be of a
different disposition from himself, was unworthy the real liberality of
mind which she was always used to acknowledge in him; for with all the
high opinion of himself, which she had often laid to his charge, she
had never before for a moment supposed it could make him unjust to the
merit of another. Willoughby
thought the same; and their behaviour at all times, was an illustration
of their opinions. snows a little I see.”

“Yes,” said John Knightley, “and I think we shall have a good deal of
it.”

“Christmas weather,” observed Mr. You
are endeavouring to disarm me by reason, and to convince me against my
will. A whole evening of back-gammon with her
father, was felicity to it. Had she intended ever to _marry_ him, it might have been worth while to
pause and consider, and try to understand the value of his preference,
and the character of his temper; but for all the purposes of their
acquaintance, he was quite amiable enough. No rumour of Lucy’s marriage had yet reached him:—he knew
nothing of what had passed; and the first hours of his visit were
consequently spent in hearing and in wondering. The struggle
was great—but it ended too soon. Mr. Yet, indeed, I
am in earnest. Weston was out of the question. Everything was too recent for
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer
anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity
would come in time. I heard a good deal of
Colonel Campbell’s taste at Weymouth; and the softness of the upper
notes I am sure is exactly what he and _all_ _that_ _party_ would
particularly prize. She could not be too soon alarmed, nor send for Perry too often. She felt that his
influence over her mind was heightened by circumstances which ought not
in reason to have weight; by that person of uncommon attraction, that
open, affectionate, and lively manner which it was no merit to possess;
and by that still ardent love for Marianne, which it was not even
innocent to indulge. Elinor told him the number of the house. Darcy is neither by
honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make
another choice? An
airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. To my fancy, a
thousand times prettier than Barton Park, where they are forced to send
three miles for their meat, and have not a neighbour nearer than your
mother. Do you know any
family of that name?”

“To be sure we do,” cried his father; “Mrs. Woodhouse had
not married early) was much increased by his constitution and habits;
for having been a valetudinarian all his life, without activity of mind
or body, he was a much older man in ways than in years; and though
everywhere beloved for the friendliness of his heart and his amiable
temper, his talents could not have recommended him at any time. What the
devil does Sir John mean by not having a billiard room in his house? To retreat
was impossible. This was one point, with
regard to Lydia at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. If I have wounded your
sister’s feelings, it was unknowingly done; and though the motives which
governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not
yet learnt to condemn them.--With respect to that other, more weighty
accusation, of having injured Mr. Ferrars to give up a woman like Miss Morton, with
thirty thousand pounds to her fortune, for Lucy Steele that had nothing
at all; and I had it from Miss Sparks myself. Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of
the moment, been led to make Mr. It was to be a
whole-length in water-colours, like Mr. Bingley urged Mr. It crossed my mind immediately that you
would not regret your friend’s leaving Highbury, for the sake of her
being settled so well. Go and
eat and drink a little more, and you will do very well. Wickham, who had returned with him the day
before from town, and, he was happy to say, had accepted a commission in
their corps. If ever there were people who, without having great wealth
themselves, had every thing they could wish for, I am sure it is us. I am sure, a
month ago, I had no more idea myself!—The strangest things do take
place!”

“When Miss Smiths and Mr. The weather added what it could of gloom. Mr. It
     was not all settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express
     was sent off to Longbourn. You are very fond of bending little minds; but
where little minds belong to rich people in authority, I think they
have a knack of swelling out, till they are quite as unmanageable as
great ones. I cannot but wonder,
     however, at her having any such fears now, because if he had at all
     cared about me, we must have met long, long ago. Weston Churchill.’—I remember that perfectly.”

“How very pleasing and proper of him!” cried the good-hearted Mrs. Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through
Longbourn House. and Mrs. She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning. Gardiner. She was confined for
some days to the house; but never had any confinement been less
irksome. She was happy, she knew she was
happy, and knew she ought to be happy. But I can assure the young ladies that I come
prepared to admire them. Marianne felt for her most sincerely; but she did more harm than good
to the cause, by turning very red and saying in an angry manner to
Margaret,

“Remember that whatever your conjectures may be, you have no right to
repeat them.”

“I never had any conjectures about it,” replied Margaret; “it was you
who told me of it yourself.”

This increased the mirth of the company, and Margaret was eagerly
pressed to say something more. I should not mind walking half the way. The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently
characteristic. Bingley’s friend, without being heard by either
of them. But everybody is to
judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls, I
assure you. They will tell me I should write to the Doctor, to get
Edward the curacy of his new living. She has a very good notion
of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne’s. His mother wished to
interest him in political concerns, to get him into parliament, or to
see him connected with some of the great men of the day. The conviction
seemed real; he looked as if he felt it. Dashwood attended them down stairs, was introduced to Mrs. As a walking
companion, Emma had very early foreseen how useful she might find her. Weston had left her seat to join
him and say, “Do not you dance, Mr. Gardiner could do. It is
an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. Dashwood’s situation, with only common
feelings, must have been highly unpleasing;—but in _her_ mind there was
a sense of honor so keen, a generosity so romantic, that any offence of
the kind, by whomsoever given or received, was to her a source of
immovable disgust. Had she been a person of consequence herself, he
would have come I dare say; and it would not have signified whether he
did or no. On
this point she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances
occurred ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted
a recollection of Jane, not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of
saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. She never
mentioned it before, because she would not alarm us. Marianne might at that moment be dying. I know what worthy people they are. This card-room would be wanted
as a card-room now; or, if cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by
their four selves, still was it not too small for any comfortable
supper? We
have nothing clever to say—not one of us. Weston’s own happiness was indisputable. Elton actually accepting the offer with much prompt
satisfaction. Every body
who sees it is struck by its beauty; but to me, it has been quite a
home. “The
party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. Wingfield most strenuously recommended it, sir—or we should not
have gone. Collins and myself on
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another,
of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Mr. my dear, as Perry says, where health is at stake, nothing else
should be considered; and if one is to travel, there is not much to
chuse between forty miles and an hundred.—Better not move at all,
better stay in London altogether than travel forty miles to get into a
worse air. Good-bye.”

She then ran gaily off, rejoicing, as she rambled about, in the hope of
being at home again in a day or two. But the letter, when she was
calm enough to read it, brought little comfort. “I do not know which it ought to be called.”

“Oh! The ivory, the gold, and the pearls,
all received their appointment, and the gentleman having named the last
day on which his existence could be continued without the possession of
the toothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisurely care, and
bestowing another glance on the Miss Dashwoods, but such a one as
seemed rather to demand than express admiration, walked off with a
happy air of real conceit and affected indifference. In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been
too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance
before. Do not you remember what Mr. If she is half as sharp as her mother,
she is saving enough. There were Mr. Do you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business to
be going forward just at this time?—Do you imagine it to be the
consequence of an immediate commission from him, or that he may have
sent only a general direction, an order indefinite as to time, to
depend upon contingencies and conveniences?”

He paused. Jane Fairfax
did look and move superior; but Emma suspected she might have been glad
to change feelings with Harriet, very glad to have purchased the
mortification of having loved—yes, of having loved even Mr. He is gone to my father already. The
park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one
of the gates into the ground. Isabella and Emma, I think, do write very much alike. “Excuse me,” said she; “and be assured
that I meant no offence to you, by speaking, in so quiet a way, of my
own feelings. I really am a most troublesome companion to you both, but I
hope I am not often so ill-equipped. She never stopt till
she had gone through the whole; and though it was impossible not to
feel that he had been wrong, yet he had been less wrong than she had
supposed—and he had suffered, and was very sorry—and he was so grateful
to Mrs. He told me every
thing; his circumstances and plans, and what they all proposed doing in
the event of his marriage. [Illustration]

Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane,
while Mrs. “I am so glad to see you!” said she, seating herself between Elinor and
Marianne, “for it is so bad a day I was afraid you might not come,
which would be a shocking thing, as we go away again tomorrow. Her approbation, at once general and
minute, warm and incessant, could not but please; and for another
half-hour they were all walking to and fro, between the different
rooms, some suggesting, some attending, and all in happy enjoyment of
the future. “EDW. Dashwood, “if my children were all to be rich without my help.”

“You must begin your improvements on this house,” observed Elinor, “and
your difficulties will soon vanish.”

“What magnificent orders would travel from this family to London,” said
Edward, “in such an event! Not a moment was lost in delay of any kind. Weston tried, in vain, to make them harmonise
better. But, Lizzy, this must go no further than yourself, or
     Jane at most. But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. “I am rather of a jealous temper too by nature, and from
our different situations in life, from his being so much more in the
world than me, and our continual separation, I was enough inclined for
suspicion, to have found out the truth in an instant, if there had been
the slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met, or any
lowness of spirits that I could not account for, or if he had talked
more of one lady than another, or seemed in any respect less happy at
Longstaple than he used to be. Till the next
morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her
contrivance. What I thought, what I
feared, may be imagined; and what I suffered too.”

“Good heavens!” cried Elinor, “could it be—could Willoughby!”—

“The first news that reached me of her,” he continued, “came in a
letter from herself, last October. Mr. God be praised!—But is it true? Woodhouse’s spirits,
which, I understand, are sometimes much depressed. In short, I could learn nothing but that she was gone; all the rest,
for eight long months, was left to conjecture. Elton treats her with all the
respect which she has a claim to. She has a fault. I can imagine, that if you, as you are, Mr. Emma, this is your
doing. The brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits, but principally
of those of the elder, whose temper was by much the most communicative,
and who was always the greater talker. Knightley’s absence, or when it came to the point her heart would
have failed her, and she must have put it off; but Mr. Jennings,
talked with her, laughed with her, and listened to her whenever she
could; and Mrs. no; cautious as a
minister of state. “I want to know,” said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her
sister’s, “what you have learnt about Mr. Mrs. happy house, could you know what I suffer in now viewing you from this
spot, from whence perhaps I may view you no more!—And you, ye
well-known trees!—but you will continue the same.—No leaf will decay
because we are removed, nor any branch become motionless although we
can observe you no longer!—No; you will continue the same; unconscious
of the pleasure or the regret you occasion, and insensible of any
change in those who walk under your shade!—But who will remain to enjoy
you?”




CHAPTER VI. Churchill’s making incredible exertions to
avoid it. They are all for what they can get. Knightley, who, for some reason best known to himself, had
certainly taken an early dislike to Frank Churchill, was only growing
to dislike him more. Weston looked surprized, and said, “I did not know that he ever
had any such plan.”

“Nay, I had it from you. Palmer, and in that little had seen so
much variety in his address to her sister and herself, that she knew
not what to expect to find him in his own family. Emma grew sick
at the sound. Mr. If I wished to think slightingly
of anybody’s children, it should not be of my own, however.”

“If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.”

“Yes; but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.”

“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I am making a conundrum. Since such were her
     feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a
     marriage, which, in his very first conversation with Wickham, he
     easily learnt had never been _his_ design. I am exceedingly sorry: but it is well that the mistake
ends where it does. Jennings had the satisfaction of discovering to be her
relations, and this was enough for Sir John to invite them directly to
the park, as soon as their present engagements at Exeter were over. Say that
urgent business calls us home immediately. James Street,” said he, soon
afterwards, rising from his chair. Darcy? I _will_ be calm; I _will_ be mistress
of myself.”

In a moment she perceived that the others were likewise aware of the
mistake. Gardiner’s hope of Lydia’s being soon married,
her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its
exuberance. I told you that I did not wonder at your attachment; that
considering the service he had rendered you, it was extremely
natural:—and you agreed to it, expressing yourself very warmly as to
your sense of that service, and mentioning even what your sensations
had been in seeing him come forward to your rescue.—The impression of
it is strong on my memory.”

“Oh, dear,” cried Harriet, “now I recollect what you mean; but I was
thinking of something very different at the time. In the first place, he must make such
an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not
offensive to his patron. regular features,
open countenance, with a complexion! “You do quite right,” said she;—“we will make your apologies to Mr. It was after tea that Jane
spoke to Mrs. The servants, I suppose, forgot to tell
you that Mr. She saw herself the object of attention to tens and to scores of them at
present unknown. For a short time he sat deep in thought, after Elinor had
ceased to speak;—at last, and as if it were rather an effort, he said,

“Colonel Brandon seems a man of great worth and respectability. Such a circumstance could only
exasperate farther; and when he ceased the colour rose into her cheeks
and she said,--

“In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to
express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however
unequally they may be returned. This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course of ten days. To those who
had no resources it was a different thing; but my resources made me
quite independent. Jennings’s address to him when he first called on
her, after their leaving her was settled—“for they are quite resolved
upon going home from the Palmers;—and how forlorn we shall be, when I
come back!—Lord! But Mrs. Must it
not have been so, Marianne?” speaking to her in a lowered voice. Mrs. There was no comfort in having him in London;
he might as well be at Enscombe; but Richmond was the very distance for
easy intercourse. I do not know whether
you have ever happened to see any of her performances before, but she
is in general reckoned to draw extremely well.”

The Colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions to connoisseurship,
warmly admired the screens, as he would have done any thing painted by
Miss Dashwood; and on the curiosity of the others being of course
excited, they were handed round for general inspection. Elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make;
which was exactly the case; for though very much gratified by the kind
care of such a fair lady, and not liking to resist any advice of her’s,
he had not really the least inclination to give up the visit;—but Emma,
too eager and busy in her own previous conceptions and views to hear
him impartially, or see him with clear vision, was very well satisfied
with his muttering acknowledgment of its being “very cold, certainly
very cold,” and walked on, rejoicing in having extricated him from
Randalls, and secured him the power of sending to inquire after Harriet
every hour of the evening. and
Mrs. She gave her an answer which marked her contempt, and instantly
left the room, resolving that, whatever might be the inconvenience or
expense of so sudden a removal, her beloved Elinor should not be
exposed another week to such insinuations. Never
better.—Don’t I hear another carriage?—Who can this be?—very likely the
worthy Coles.—Upon my word, this is charming to be standing about among
such friends! Sir John had been very urgent with them all to spend the next day at
the park. “They told me—that Mr. An union of a different tendency, and
precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their
family. She is not to pay
for the offence of others, by being held below the level of those with
whom she is brought up.—There can scarcely be a doubt that her father
is a gentleman—and a gentleman of fortune.—Her allowance is very
liberal; nothing has ever been grudged for her improvement or
comfort.—That she is a gentleman’s daughter, is indubitable to me; that
she associates with gentlemen’s daughters, no one, I apprehend, will
deny.—She is superior to Mr. Mr. Darcy’s having both spent three
weeks at Rosings, and asked him if he were acquainted with the former. “I think she must be here soon,” said he. She thought it probable that as
they lived in the same county, Mrs. Come, come, this won’t do. Woodhouse having, as usual, tried to persuade his daughter to stay
behind with all her children, was obliged to see the whole party set
off, and return to his lamentations over the destiny of poor
Isabella;—which poor Isabella, passing her life with those she doated
on, full of their merits, blind to their faults, and always innocently
busy, might have been a model of right feminine happiness. Blessed with so many resources within myself, the world was
not necessary to _me_. I must see what I can give them
towards furnishing their house. This discovery laid many smaller matters open. It was a comfort
to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied by long
expectations. His good sense and good principles would delight
you.—As far as the man is concerned, you could not wish your friend in
better hands. I was last month at my friend
Elliott’s, near Dartford. Having arranged all these matters, looked them through, and put them
all to rights, she was just turning to the house with spirits freshened
up for the demands of the two little boys, as well as of their
grandpapa, when the great iron sweep-gate opened, and two persons
entered whom she had never less expected to see together—Frank
Churchill, with Harriet leaning on his arm—actually Harriet!—A moment
sufficed to convince her that something extraordinary had happened. “Aye, that’s very just, indeed, that’s very properly said. As soon as they entered the house, Marianne with a
kiss of gratitude and these two words just articulate through her
tears, “Tell mama,” withdrew from her sister and walked slowly up
stairs. Even then, I
was not such a fool as not to mean to be reconciled in time; but I was
the injured person, injured by her coldness, and I went away determined
that she should make the first advances.—I shall always congratulate
myself that you were not of the Box Hill party. I suppose it is
something he is ashamed of.”

Colonel Brandon’s horses were announced. Shall I?—Yes, I will—I declare I will—and you shall
see how she takes it;—whether she colours.”

He was gone immediately; and Emma soon saw him standing before Miss
Fairfax, and talking to her; but as to its effect on the young lady, as
he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them, exactly in
front of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing. I cannot forget the follies and vices of
others so soon as I ought, nor their offences against myself. But I thought he would have staid now, and it
would have been a pity not to have mentioned.... This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in
which we have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely
reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty
towards Mr. I have some notion of putting such a
trimming as this to my white and silver poplin. very well,” exclaimed Miss Bates, “then I need not be uneasy. Weston, who had
been calling on her daughter-in-law elect, and took Hartfield in her
way home, almost as much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself, to
relate all the particulars of so interesting an interview. I am advised to be out of doors as much as I can, I must walk
somewhere, and the post-office is an object; and upon my word, I have
scarcely ever had a bad morning before.”

“My dear Jane, say no more about it. Darcy, who never looks at any
woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at _you_ in
his life! Is this your gratitude
for my attentions to you last spring? The anxious cares, the incessant
attentions of Mrs. To Rosings he then
hastened to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return
brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her Ladyship,
importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of
having them all to dine with her. Elton is good-humoured, cheerful, obliging, and gentle. “Not the least in the world.—Did he ever give you any thing?”

“No—I cannot call them gifts; but they are things that I have valued
very much.”

She held the parcel towards her, and Emma read the words _Most_
_precious_ _treasures_ on the top. Wickham, I can only refute it by
laying before you the whole of his connection with my family. He owed it to
her, to risk any thing that might be involved in an unwelcome
interference, rather than her welfare; to encounter any thing, rather
than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause. I come in for a pretty good share as a second. Elton as
a model. Weston, who had called in for
half a minute, in order to hear that his son was very handsome, knew
nothing of their plans; and it was an agreeable surprize to her,
therefore, to perceive them walking up to the house together, arm in
arm. Elinor then
ventured to doubt the propriety of her receiving such a present from a
man so little, or at least so lately known to her. You cannot think what a sweet place Cleveland is; and we are so gay
now, for Mr. In a softened tone she declared
herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologize for about a
quarter of an hour. _Her_ connexions may be worse than
_his_. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her
deserving her mother’s reproach prevented his feeling any regret. After a moment’s pause, he spoke
with calmness. “And when she has forgiven you, perhaps a little humility may be
convenient while acknowledging a second engagement, almost as imprudent
in _her_ eyes as the first.”

He had nothing to urge against it, but still resisted the idea of a
letter of proper submission; and therefore, to make it easier to him,
as he declared a much greater willingness to make mean concessions by
word of mouth than on paper, it was resolved that, instead of writing
to Fanny, he should go to London, and personally intreat her good
offices in his favour. But
I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.”

From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. “Do you know Mr. Mr. I should infinitely prefer a book.”

But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. May is the very month which Mrs. and
Mrs. While he lived, it must be only an
engagement; but she flattered herself, that if divested of the danger
of drawing her away, it might become an increase of comfort to him.—How
to do her best by Harriet, was of more difficult decision;—how to spare
her from any unnecessary pain; how to make her any possible atonement;
how to appear least her enemy?—On these subjects, her perplexity and
distress were very great—and her mind had to pass again and again
through every bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever
surrounded it.—She could only resolve at last, that she would still
avoid a meeting with her, and communicate all that need be told by
letter; that it would be inexpressibly desirable to have her removed
just now for a time from Highbury, and—indulging in one scheme
more—nearly resolve, that it might be practicable to get an invitation
for her to Brunswick Square.—Isabella had been pleased with Harriet;
and a few weeks spent in London must give her some amusement.—She did
not think it in Harriet’s nature to escape being benefited by novelty
and variety, by the streets, the shops, and the children.—At any rate,
it would be a proof of attention and kindness in herself, from whom
every thing was due; a separation for the present; an averting of the
evil day, when they must all be together again. If I come, I shall be cross.”

“Then pray stay at Richmond.”

“But if I do, I shall be crosser still. “Oh! She looked again. Emma sat with her as long as she could, to attend her in Mrs. The pain of being
obliged to practise concealment towards him, was very little inferior
to the pain of having made Harriet unhappy. Darcy,” she cried: “I
never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since the winter. What was unwholesome to him he regarded as
unfit for any body; and he had, therefore, earnestly tried to dissuade
them from having any wedding-cake at all, and when that proved vain, as
earnestly tried to prevent any body’s eating it. She went on,--

“From the very beginning, from the first moment, I may almost say, of my
acquaintance with you, your manners impressing me with the fullest
belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the
feelings of others, were such as to form that groundwork of
disapprobation, on which succeeding events have built so immovable a
dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the
last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.”

“You have said quite enough, madam. The fishing scheme had been
renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting
some of the gentlemen at Pemberley by noon. My aunt told me
so herself on Saturday. He was a great deal too full of the market to think of any thing
else—which is just as it should be, for a thriving man. Happy those, who can remain at
Highbury!”

“As you do us such ample justice now,” said Emma, laughing, “I will
venture to ask, whether you did not come a little doubtfully at first? She blushed at the very idea; and
thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt, than to run such
a risk. No principle of either
would be violated by my marriage with Mr. I have neglected her too long. The boy
had, with the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of his
mother’s, been the means of a sort of reconciliation; and Mr. Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this step (and
let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. Jennings was in hopes, by this vigorous sketch of their
future ennui, to provoke him to make that offer, which might give
himself an escape from it; and if so, she had soon afterwards good
reason to think her object gained; for, on Elinor’s moving to the
window to take more expeditiously the dimensions of a print, which she
was going to copy for her friend, he followed her to it with a look of
particular meaning, and conversed with her there for several minutes. Weston that Mrs. Her look and manners were open,
cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar
regard; and I remained convinced, from the evening’s scrutiny, that
though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite
them by any participation of sentiment. Are those
who have been disappointed in their first choice, whether from the
inconstancy of its object, or the perverseness of circumstances, to be
equally indifferent during the rest of their lives?”

“Upon my word, I am not acquainted with the minutiae of her principles. And there is one
thing more preparing against him, which must be worse than all—his
mother has determined, with a very natural kind of spirit, to settle
_that_ estate upon Robert immediately, which might have been Edward’s,
on proper conditions. Weston, who came out, in her solicitude after her son-in-law, to
inquire if he were come—and she was a little uneasy.—She had some fears
of his horse. My behaviour must have seemed strange to you then; but now
you will comprehend it. Poor Edward! “I
have a great curiosity to see Mrs. Knightley, coolly;
“but I dare say he might come if he would.”

“I do not know why you should say so. Good gracious! The young ladies arrived: their appearance was by no means ungenteel or
unfashionable. Elton and his bride. if you had
seen her, as I did, when she was at the worst!”—And when Mrs. While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the
door-bell; and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its
being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in
the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her. “_You_ were Mr. Knightley might quarrel with her, but Emma could not quarrel with
herself. and her calling here was prodigiously
civil! What can you suppose?”

Elinor looked surprised at his emotion; but trying to laugh off the
subject, she said to him, “Do not you know my sister well enough to
understand what she means? And besides that, my
cousin Richard said himself, that when it came to the point he was
afraid Mr. I forget where we had
been walking to—very likely to Randalls; yes, I think it was to
Randalls. It was a sad change. Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful
friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked
herself. Darcy looked, therefore, she could
not tell. ‘Can I do any thing for you at
Kingston?’ said he; so I just mentioned.... The spring I always think
requires more than common care. Dashwood then begged to know to whom she was
obliged. “From what we have seen of him,” continued Mrs. [Illustration:

     “delighted to see their dear friend again”
]




CHAPTER XVII. As a
friend of mine, of my family, he may, perhaps—indeed I know he _has_,
still greater pleasure in bestowing it; but, upon my word, you owe
nothing to my solicitation.”

Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small share in the action, but
she was at the same time so unwilling to appear as the benefactress of
Edward, that she acknowledged it with hesitation; which probably
contributed to fix that suspicion in his mind which had recently
entered it. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more
imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must
be greater than at home. With strong concern, and with many reproaches for not being called to
their aid, did Mrs. Martin. “Oh dear, yes; I know him extremely well,” replied Mrs. She came
hallooing to the window, “How do you do, my dear? Elton’s beginning to talk to him. His wife was not always out of humour, nor his home
always uncomfortable; and in his breed of horses and dogs, and in
sporting of every kind, he found no inconsiderable degree of domestic
felicity. Lydia has no
brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father’s
behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever
seemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that _he_ would
do as little and think as little about it, as any father could do, in
such a matter.”

“But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of him,
as to consent to live with him on any other terms than marriage?”

“It does seem, and it is most shocking, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, with
tears in her eyes, “that a sister’s sense of decency and virtue in such
a point should admit of doubt. Lydia’s thoughtlessness first betrayed to
me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could
not rest till I knew the particulars. Philips, who had been a clerk to their
father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in
London in a respectable line of trade. If from no better
motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest,--for
dishonesty I must call it.”

“It _is_ wonderful,” replied Wickham; “for almost all his actions may be
traced to pride; and pride has often been his best friend. It was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now
walked after her to church. Bennet, we shall have her
at Netherfield at last!’ She did, indeed. And Lady Middleton, is _she_ angry?”

“I cannot suppose it possible that she should be.”

“I am monstrous glad of it. We must look for the change elsewhere.”




CHAPTER XX. She could not but suppose it to be a
match that every body who knew them must think of. Such a thought would never enter either Sir John or Lady
Middleton’s head; and therefore very little leisure was ever given for
a general chat, and none at all for particular discourse. Marianne gave one glance round the apartment as she entered: it
was enough—_he_ was not there—and she sat down, equally ill-disposed to
receive or communicate pleasure. My behaviour,
during the very happy fortnight which I spent with you, did not, I
hope, lay me open to reprehension, excepting on one point. After a moment’s recollection, therefore, concluding that
prudence required dispatch, and that her acquiescence would best
promote it, she walked silently towards the table, and sat down. This is saying very plainly—‘Pray, Miss Smith,
give me leave to pay my addresses to you. They wanted him to make a fine
figure in the world in some manner or other. Churchill—only it seems too good—but just as
you please. Mr. It was a
handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground. I must beg to return to
the house.”

And she rose as she spoke. But I confess they would have no charms for
_me_. I am
particularly glad to see and shake hands with you—and to give you joy
in person.”

He thanked her with all his heart, and continued some time to speak
with serious feeling of his gratitude and happiness. Donwell and Randalls had received their
invitation, and none had come for her father and herself; and Mrs. Depend upon it, we shall
soon hear that it is a present from Mr. Philips were now productive of the most interesting
intelligence. No; whatever it might once have been, she
could not believe it such at present. It is not every body that would have stood out in
such a kind way as she did, and refuse to take Jane’s answer; but she
positively declared she would _not_ write any such denial yesterday, as
Jane wished her; she would wait—and, sure enough, yesterday evening it
was all settled that Jane should go.